In the following pages, 
I shall demonstrate that there is a 
psychological technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams, 
and that on the application of this technique, 
every dream will reveal itself as a psychological structure, 
full of significance, 
and one which may be assigned to a specific place in 
the psychic activities of the waking state.
Further, 
I shall endeavor to elucidate the processes which underlie the strangeness 
and obscurity of dreams, 
and to deduce from these processes the 
nature of the psychic forces whose conflict or co-operation is responsible for our dreams.
This done, 
my investigation will terminate, 
as it will have reached the point where the problem of 
the dream merges into more comprehensive problems, 
and to solve these, 
we must have recourse to material of a different kind.
 

I shall begin by giving a short account of the views of earlier 
writers on this subject and of the status of the dream-problem 
in contemporary science;
since in the course of this treatise, 
I shall not often have occasion to refer to either.
In spite of thousands of years of endeavor, 
little progress has been made in the 
scientific understanding of dreams.
This fact has been so universally acknowledged by previous writers on the subject that it 
seems hardly necessary to quote individual opinions.
The reader 
will find, 
in many stimulating observations, 
and plenty of interesting material relating to our subject, 
but little or nothing that 
concerns the true nature of the dream, 
or that solves definitely any of its enigmas.

The educated layman, 
of course, 
knows even 
less of the matter.
 

The conception of the dream that was held in prehistoric ages 
by primitive peoples, 
and the influence which it may have exerted on the formation of their conceptions of the universe, 
and of the soul, 
is a theme of such great interest that it is only with 
reluctance that I refrain from dealing with it in these pages.
I will refer the reader to the well-known works of Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury), 
Herbert Spencer, 
E.
B.
Tylor and other 
writers;
I will only add that we shall not realize the importance 
of these problems and speculations until we have completed 
the task of dream interpretation that lies before us.