In the following pages, 
I shall demonstrate that there is a 
psychological technique which makes it possible to interpret dreams, 
and that on the application of this technique, 
every dream will reveal itself as a psychological structure, 
full of significance, 
and one which may be assigned to a specific place in 
the psychic activities of the waking state.
Further, 
I shall endeavor to elucidate the processes which underlie the strangeness 
and obscurity of dreams, 
and to deduce from these processes the 
nature of the psychic forces whose conflict or co-operation is responsible for our dreams.
This done, 
my investigation will terminate, 
as it will have reached the point where the problem of 
the dream merges into more comprehensive problems, 
and to solve these, 
we must have recourse to material of a different kind.
 

I shall begin by giving a short account of the views of earlier 
writers on this subject and of the status of the dream-problem 
in contemporary science;
since in the course of this treatise, 
I shall not often have occasion to refer to either.
In spite of thousands of years of endeavor, 
little progress has been made in the 
scientific understanding of dreams.
This fact has been so universally acknowledged by previous writers on the subject that it 
seems hardly necessary to quote individual opinions.
The reader 
will find, 
in many stimulating observations, 
and plenty of interesting material relating to our subject, 
but little or nothing that 
concerns the true nature of the dream, 
or that solves definitely any of its enigmas.

The educated layman, 
of course, 
knows even 
less of the matter.
 

The conception of the dream that was held in prehistoric ages 
by primitive peoples, 
and the influence which it may have exerted on the formation of their conceptions of the universe, 
and of the soul, 
is a theme of such great interest that it is only with 
reluctance that I refrain from dealing with it in these pages.
I will refer the reader to the well-known works of Sir John Lubbock (Lord Avebury), 
Herbert Spencer, 
E.
B.
Tylor and other 
writers;
I will only add that we shall not realize the importance 
of these problems and speculations until we have completed 
the task of dream interpretation that lies before us.
 

A reminiscence of the concept of the dream that was held in 
primitive times seems to underlie the evaluation of the dream 
which was current among the peoples of classical antiquity .
 1 
They took it for granted that dreams were related to the world 
of the supernatural beings in whom they believed, 
and that they brought inspirations from the gods and demons.
Moreover, 
it appeared to them that dreams must serve a special purpose in 
respect of the dreamer;
that, 
as a rule, 
they predicted the future.
 
The extraordinary variations in the content of dreams, 
and in the impressions which they produced on the dreamer, 
made it, 
of course, 
very difficult to formulate a coherent conception of them, 
and necessitated manifold differentiations and group-formations, 
according to their value and reliability.

The valuation of dreams 
by the individual philosophers of antiquity naturally depended 
on the importance which they were prepared to attribute to 
manticism in general.
 

In the two works of Aristotle in which there is mention of 
dreams, 
they are already regarded as constituting a problem of 
psychology.

We are told that the dream is not god-sent, 
that 
it is not of divine but of daimonic origin.

For nature is really 
daimonic, 
not divine;
that is to say, 
the dream is not a supernatural revelation, 
but is subject to the laws of the human spirit,  
which has, 
of course, 
a kinship with the divine.

The dream is 
defined as the psychic activity of the sleeper, 
inasmuch as he is 
asleep.

Aristotle was acquainted with some of the characteristics 
of the dream-life;
for example, 
he knew that a dream converts 
the slight sensations perceived in sleep into intense sensations 
(one imagines that one is walking through fire, 
and feels hot,  
if this or that part of the body becomes only quite slightly 
warm), 
which led him to conclude that dreams might easily 
betray to the physician the first indications of an incipient physical change which escaped observation during the day. 

As has been said, 
those writers of antiquity who preceded 
Aristotle did not regard the dream as a product of the dreaming 
psyche, 
but as an inspiration of divine origin, 
and in ancient times, 
the two opposing tendencies which we shall find throughout the ages in respect of the evaluation of the dream-life, 
were already perceptible.

The ancients distinguished between the 
true and valuable dreams which were sent to the dreamer as 
warnings, 
or to foretell future events, 
and the vain, 
fraudulent 
and empty dreams, 
whose object was to misguide him or lead him 
to destruction.
 

The pre-scientific conception of the dream which obtained 
among the ancients was, 
of course, 
in perfect keeping with their 
general conception of the universe, 
which was accustomed to 
project as an external reality that which possessed reality only 
in the life of the psyche.

Further, 
it accounted for the main impression made upon the waking life by the morning memory 
of the dream;
for in this memory the dream, 
as compared with the rest of the psychic content, 
seems to be something alien, 
coming, 
as it were, 
from another world.
It would be an error to 
suppose that the theory of the supernatural origin of dreams 
lacks followers even in our own times;
for quite apart from 
pietistic and mystical writers — who cling, 
as they are perfectly justified in doing, 
to the remnants of the once predominant realm of the supernatural until these remnants have been swept 
away by scientific explanation — we not infrequently find that 
quite intelligent persons, 
 who in other respects are averse to 
anything of a romantic nature, 
 go so far as to base their religious 
belief in the existence and co-operation of superhuman spiritual 
powers on the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of dreams (Haffner).

The validity ascribed to the dream life by certain 
schools of philosophy — 
for example, 
by the school of Schelling — 
is a distinct reminiscence of the undisputed belief in the divinity 
of dreams which prevailed in antiquity;
and for some thinkers, 
the mantic or prophetic power of dreams is still a subject of debate.

This is due to the fact that the explanations attempted 
by psychology are too inadequate to cope with the accumulated material, 
however strongly the scientific thinker may feel that 
such superstitious doctrines should be repudiated.
 

To write a history of our scientific knowledge of the dream 
problem is extremely difficult, 
because, 
valuable though this knowledge may be in certain respects, 
no real progress in a definite direction is as yet discernible.
No real foundation of verified results has hitherto been established
on which future investigators might continue to build.

Every new author approaches 
the same problems afresh, 
and from the very beginning.
If I were to enumerate such authors in chronological order, 
giving a survey of the opinions which each has held concerning the problems of the dream, 
I should be quite unable to draw a clear and 
complete picture of the present state of our knowledge on the 
subject.

I have therefore preferred to base my method of treatment on themes rather than on authors, 
and in attempting the solution of each problem of the dream, 
I shall cite the material found in the literature of the subject.
 
But as I have not succeeded in mastering the whole of this literature —
for it is widely dispersed and interwoven with the literature of other subjects —
I must ask my readers to rest content 
with my survey as it stands, 
provided that no fundamental fact 
or important point of view has been overlooked.
 

In a supplement to a later German edition, 
the author adds: 
I shall have to justify myself for not extending my summary 
of the literature of dream problems to cover the period between 
first appearance of this book and the publication of the second 
edition.

This justification may not seem very satisfactory to the reader;
none the less, 
to me it was decisive.

The motives which 
induced me to summarize the treatment of dreams in the literature 
of the subject have been exhausted by the foregoing introduction;
to have continued this would have cost me a great deal 
of effort and would not have been particularly useful or instructive.

For the interval in question —
a period of nine years —
has yielded nothing new or valuable as regards the conception of dreams, 
either in actual material or in novel points of view.
In most of the literature which has appeared since the publication of my own work, 
the latter has not been mentioned or discussed; 
it has, 
of course, 
received the least attention from the so-called 
research workers on dreams, 
who have thus afforded a brilliant example of the aversion
to learning anything new so characteristic of the scientist.

Les savants ne sont pas curieux, 
said the scoffer, 
Anatole France.

If there were such a thing in 
science as the right of revenge, 
I, 
in my turn, 
should be justified 
in ignoring the literature which has appeared since the publication of this book.

The few reviews which have appeared in the 
scientific journals are so full of misconceptions and lack of comprehension that
my only possible answer to my critics would be
a request that they should read this book over again — or perhaps 
merely that they should read it I 

And in a supplement to the fourth German edition which appeared in 1914, 
a year after I published the first English translation of this work, 
he writes: 

Since then, 
the state of affairs has certainly undergone a 
change;
my contribution to the interpretation of dreams is no longer ignored in the literature of the subject.

But the new situation makes it even more impossible to continue the foregoing summary.

The Interpretation of Dreams has evoked a whole 
series of new contentions and problems, 
which have been expounded by the authors in the most varied fashions.
But I cannot discuss these works until I have developed the theories to 
which their authors have referred.

Whatever has appeared to me 
as valuable in this recent literature, 
I have accordingly reviewed 
in the course of the following exposition.
 
The epigraph on the title-page of this volume indicates the tradition
to which
I prefer to ally myself in my conception of the
dream.

I am proposing to show that dreams are capable of interpretation;
and any contributions to the solution of the problem 
which have already been discussed will emerge only as possible 
by-products in the accomplishment of my special task.
On the hypothesis that dreams are susceptible of interpretation, 
I at once find myself in disagreement with the prevailing doctrine of 
dreams —
in fact, 
with all the theories of dreams, 
excepting only that of Schemer, 
for to interpret a dream,
is to specify its meaning, 
to replace it by something which takes its position 
in the concatenation of our psychic activities as a link of definite 
importance and value.

But, 
as we have seen, 
the scientific theories 
of the dream leave no room for a problem of dream-interpretation;
since, 
in the first place, 
according to these theories, 
dreaming is not a psychic activity at all, 
but a somatic process which 
makes itself known to the psychic apparatus by means of symbols.

Lay opinion has always been opposed to these theories.
It asserts its privilege of proceeding illogically, 
and although it 
admits that dreams are incomprehensible and absurd, 
it cannot 
summon up the courage to deny that dreams have any significance.

Led by a dim intuition, 
it seems rather to assume that 
dreams have a meaning, 
albeit a hidden one;
that they are intended 
as a substitute for some other thought-process, 
and that 
we have only to disclose this substitute correctly in order to 
discover the hidden meaning of the dream.
 
The unscientific world, 
therefore, 
has always endeavored to 
interpret dreams, 
and by applying one or the other of two 
essentially different methods.

The first of these methods envisages the dream-content as a whole, 
and seeks to replace it by 
another content, 
which is intelligible and in certain respects analogous.

This is symbolic dream-interpretation;
and of course it 
goes to pieces at the very outset in the case of those dreams 
which are not only unintelligible but confused.

The construction 
which the biblical Joseph placed upon the dream of Pharaoh furnishes an example of this method.

The seven fat ldne, 
after which 
came seven lean ones that devoured the former, 
were a symbolic 
substitute for seven years of famine in the land of Egypt, 
which 
according to the prediction were to consume all the surplus that 
seven fruitful years had produced.

Most of the artificial dreams 
contrived by the poets 1 are intended for some such symbolic interpretation, 
for they reproduce the thought conceived by the 
poet in a guise not unlike the disguise which we are wont to find 
in our dreams.
 
The idea that the dream concerns itself chiefly with the future, 
whose form it surmises in advance —
a relic of the prophetic significance with which dreams were once invested —
now becomes 
the motive for translating into the future the meaning of the 
dream which has been found by means of symbolic interpretation. 

A demonstration of the manner in which one arrives at such a 
symbolic interpretation cannot, 
of course, 
be given.

Success remains a matter of ingenious conjecture, 
of direct intuition, 
and for this reason dream-interpretation has naturally been elevated 
into an art which seems to depend upon extraordinary gifts.

The second of the two popular methods of dream-interpretation entirely abandons such claims.
It might be described as the cipher method, 
since it treats the dream as a kind of secret code in 
which every sign is translated into another sign of known meaning, 
according to an established key.

For example, 
I have dreamt 
of a letter, 
and also of a funeral or the like;
I consult a dreambook, 
33 and I find that letter 3 is to be translated by vexation 33 
and funeral 33 by engagement.

It now remains to establish 
a connection, 
which I am again to assume as pertaining to the 
future, 
by means of the rigmarole which I have deciphered.

An 
interesting variant of this cipher procedure, 
a variant in which 
its character of purely mechanical transference is to a certain 
extent corrected, 
is presented in the work on dream-interpretation by Artemidoros of Daldis .

Here not only the dream-content, 
but also the personality and social position of the dreamer are 
taken into consideration, 
so that the same dream-content has a 
significance for the rich man, 
the married man, 
or the orator,  
which is different from that which applies to the poor man, 
the bachelor, 
or, 
let us say, 
the merchant.

The essential point, 
then,  
in this procedure is that the work of interpretation is not applied 
to the entirety of the dream, 
but to each portion of the dreamcontent severally, 
as though the dream were a conglomerate in 
which each fragment calls for special treatment.

Incoherent and 
confused dreams are certaintly those that have been responsible 
for the invention of the cipher method .

The worthlessness of both these popular methods of interprewriter relates as follows:
Pour inter pr iter exactement un songe les onirom anciens
les plus habiles s’informent de ceux qui les consultent de toutes les
circonstances qu’ils regardent nScessaires pour la bonne explication.

En 
un mot, 
nos oniromanciens ne laissent aucune circonstance leur ichapper et 
?ie donnent Vinterpritation d&siri avant d'avoir parfaitement saisi et reQU 
toutes les interrogations desirables Among these questions one always finds 
demands for precise information in respect to near relatives,
parents, 
wife, 
children,
as well as the following formula: 
habistine in hoc node copulam 
conjugalem ante vel post somnium? —
L’idSe dominante dans Vinter prita tion des songes consiste a expliquer le reve par son oppose. 

talion does not admit of discussion.

As regards the scientific 
treatment of the subject, 
the symbolic method is limited in its 
application, 
and is not susceptible of a general exposition.

In the 
cipher method everything depends upon whether the key, 
the dream-book, 
is reliable, 
and for that all guarantees are lacking.
 
So that one might be tempted to grant the contention of the 
philosophers and psychiatrists, 
and to dismiss the problem of 
dream-interpretation as altogether fanciful.

I have, 
however, 
come to think differently.

I have been forced 
to perceive that here, 
once more, 
we have one of those not infrequent cases where an ancient and stubbornly retained popular 
belief seems to have come nearer to the truth of the matter than 
the opinion of modern science.

I must insist that the dream actually does possess a meaning, 
and that a scientific method of 
dream-interpretation is possible.
I arrived at my knowledge of 
this method in the following manner: 
For years I have been occupied with the resolution of certain 
psychopathological structures — hysterical phobias, 
obsessional ideas, 
and the like— 
with therapeutic intentions.

I have been so 
occupied, 
in fact, 
ever since I heard the significant statement of Joseph Breuer, 
to the effect that in these structures, 
regarded as 
morbid symptoms, 
solution and treatment go hand in hand.
 
Where it has been possible to trace a pathological idea back to 
those elements in the psychic life of the patient to which it owed 
its origin, 
this idea has crumbled away, 
and the patient has been 
relieved of it.

In view of the failure of our other therapeutic 
efforts, 
and in the face of the mysterious character of these pathological conditions, 
it seemed to me tempting, 
in spite of all the 
difficulties, 
to follow the method initiated by Breuer until a 
complete elucidation of the subject had been achieved.

I shall 
have occasion elsewhere to give a detailed account of the form
which the technique of this procedure has finally assumed, 
and of 
the results of my efforts.
In the course of these psychoanalytic 
studies, 
I happened upon the question of dream-interpretation.
 
My patients, 
after I had pledged them to inform me of all the 
ideas and thoughts which occurred to them in connection with 
a given theme, 
related their dreams, 
and thus taught me that a 
dream may be interpolated in the psychic concatenation, 
which may be followed backwards from a pathological idea into a patient’s memory.
The next step was to treat the dream itself as a 
symptom, 
and to apply to it the method of interpretation which 
had been worked out for such symptoms.
 
For this a certain psychic preparation on the part of the patient is necessary.
A twofold effort is made, 
to stimulate his attentiveness in respect of his psychic perceptions, 
and to eliminate 
the critical spirit in which he is ordinarily in the habit of viewing such thoughts as come to the surface.

For the purpose of selfobservation with concentrated attention it is advantageous that 
the patient should take up a restful position and close his eyes;
 he must be explicitly instructed to renounce all criticism of the 
thought formations which he may perceive.

He must also be 
told that the success of the psychoanalysis depends upon his noting and communicating
everything that passes through his mind,
and that he must not allow himself to suppress one idea because 
it seems to him unimportant or irrelevant to the subject, 
or another because it seems nonsensical.

He must preserve an absolute 
impartiality in respect to his ideas;
for if he is unsuccessful in 
finding the desired solution of the dream, 
the obsessional idea, 
or the like, 
it will be because he permits himself to be critical of 
them.
 
I have noticed in the course of my psychoanalytical work that 
the psychological state of a man in an attitude of reflection is 
entirely different from that of a man who is observing his psychic 
processes.

In reflection there is a greater play of psychic activity 
than in the most attentive self-observation;
this is shown even by 
the tense attitude and the wrinkled brow of the man in a state of 
reflection, 
as opposed to the mimic tranquillity of the man observing himself.

In both cases there must be concentrated attention, 
but the reflective man makes use of his critical faculties, 
with the result that he rejects some of the thoughts which rise into 
consciousness after he has become aware of them, 
and abruptly 
interrupts others, 
so that he does not follow the lines of thought 
which they would otherwise open up for him;
while in respect of 
yet other thoughts he is able to behave in such a manner that they 
do not become conscious at all — 
that is to say, 
they are suppressed before they are perceived.

In self-observation, 
on the other hand, 
he has but one task — that of suppressing criticism; 
if he succeeds in doing this, 
an unlimited number of thoughts 
enter his consciousness which would otherwise have eluded his 
grasp.

With the aid of the material thus obtained — material 
which is new to the self-observer — it is possible to achieve the interpretation of pathological ideas, 
and also that of dream-formations.
As will be seen, 
the point is to induce a psychic state which 
is in some degree analogous, 
as regards the distribution of psychic 
energy (mobile attention), 
to the state of the mind before falling 
asleep —
and also, 
of course, 
to the hypnotic state.

On falling 
asleep the undesired ideas emerge, 
owing to the slackening of 
a certain arbitrary (and, 
of course, 
also critical) action, 
which 
is allowed to influence the trend of our ideas;
we are accustomed 
to speak of fatigue as the reason of this slackening;
the merging 
undesired ideas are changed into visual and auditory images.

In the condition which it utilized for the analysis of dreams and 
pathological ideas, 
this activity is purposely and deliberately 
renounced, 
and the psychic energy thus saved (or some part of it) is employed
in attentively tracking the undesired thoughts
which now come to the surface — thoughts which retain their 
identity as ideas (in which the condition differs from the state 
of falling asleep).

Undesired ideas are thus changed into desired ones.

There are many people who do not seem to find it easy to adopt 
the required attitude toward the apparently freely rising ideas,  
and to renounce the criticism which is otherwise applied to them.

The undesired ideas habitually evoke the most violent resistance, 
which seeks to prevent them from coming to the surface.
 
But if we may credit our great poet-philosopher Friedrich Schiller, 
the essential condition of poetical creation includes a very 
similar attitude.

In a certain passage in his correspondence with 
Korner (for the tracing of which we are indebted to Otto Rank),  
Schiller replies in the following words to a friend who complains 
of his lack of creative power: The reason for your complaint lies, 
it seems to me, 
in the constraint which your intellect imposes 
upon your imagination.

Here I will make an observation, 
and illustrate it by an allegory.

Apparently it is not good — and indeed it hinders the creative work of the mind — if the intellect 
examines too closely the ideas already pouring in, 
as it were, 
at the gates.

Regarded in isolation, 
an idea may be quite insignificant, 
and venturesome in the extreme, 
but it may acquire importance from an idea which follows it;
perhaps, 
in a certain collocation with other ideas, 
which may seem equally absurd, 
it may be capable of furnishing a very serviceable link.

The intellect 
cannot judge all these ideas unless it can retain them until it has 
considered them in connection with these other ideas.

In the case 
of a creative mind, 
it seems to me, 
the intellect has withdrawn its 
watchers from the gates, 
and the ideas rush in pell-mell, 
and only 
then does it review and inspect the multitude.

You worthy critics, 
or whatever you may call yourselves, 
are ashamed or afraid 
of the momentary and passing madness which is found in all 
real creators, 
the longer or shorter duration of which distinguishes the thinking artist from the dreamer.

Hence your complaints of unfruitfulness, 
for you reject too soon and discriminate 
too severely (letter of December i, 
1788).

And yet, 
such a withdrawal of the watchers from the gates of 
the intellect, 
as Schiller puts it, 
such a translation into the condition of uncritical self-observation, 
is by no means difficult.
 
Most of my patients accomplish it after my first instructions, 
myself can do so very completely, 
if I assist the process by writing down the ideas that flasli through my mind.

The quantum 
of psychic energy by which the critical activity is thus reduced,  
and by which the intensity of self-observation may be increased,  
varies considerably according to the subject-matter upon which 
the attention is to be fixed.

The first step in the application of this procedure teaches us 
that one cannot make the dream as a whole the object of one’s 
attention, 
but only the individual components of its content.
 
If I ask a patient who is as yet unpractised: What occurs to you 
in connection with this dream ?  he is unable, 
as a rule, 
to fix upon 
anything in his psychic field of vision.

I must first dissect the 
dream for him;
then, 
in connection with each fragment, 
he gives 
me a number of ideas which may be described as the thoughts 
behind this part of the dream.
In this first and important condition, 
then, 
the method of dream-interpretation which I employ 
diverges from the popular, 
historical and legendary method of 
interpretation by symbolism and approaches more nearly to the 
second or cipher method.
Like this, 
it is an interpretation in 
detail, 
not en masse;
like this, 
it conceives the dream, 
from tire 
outset, 
as something built up, 
as a conglomerate of psychic formations.
 

In the course of my psychoanalysis of neurotics I have already 
subjected perhaps more than a thousand dreams to interpretation, 
but I do not wish to use this material now as an introduction to
the theory and technique of dream-interpretation.

For 
quite apart from the fact that I should lay myself open to the 
objection that these are the dreams of neuropaths, 
so that the 
conclusions drawn from them would not apply to the dreams of 
healthy persons, 
there is another reason that impels me to reject 
them.

The theme to which these dreams point is, 
of course, 
always the history of the malady that is responsible for the neurosis.

Hence every dream would require a very long introduction, 
and an investigation of the nature and etiological conditions 
of the psychoneuroses, 
matters which are in themselves novel 
and exceedingly strange, 
and which would therefore distract attention from the dream-problem proper.

My purpose is rather 
to prepare the way, 
by the solution of the dream-problem, 
for 
the solution of the more difficult problems of the psychology of 
the neuroses.

But if I eliminate the dreams of neurotics, 
which 
constitute my principal material, 
I cannot be too fastidious in 
my treatment of the rest.

Only those dreams are left which have 
been incidentally related to me by healthy persons of my acquaintance, 
or which I find given as examples in the literature 
of dream-life.

Unfortunately, 
in all these dreams I am deprived 
of the analysis without which I cannot find the meaning of the 
dream.
My mode of procedure is, 
of course, 
less easy than that of 
the popular cipher method, 
which translates the given dreamcontent by reference to an established key;
I, 
on the contrary,  
hold that the same dream-content may conceal a different 
meaning in the case of different persons, 
or in different connections.

I must, 
therefore, 
resort to my own dreams as a source of 
abundant and convenient material, 
furnished by a person who 
is more or less normal, 
and containing references to many incidents of everyday life.
I shall certainly be confronted with doubts 
as to the trustworthiness of these self-analyses, 
and it will be 
said that arbitrariness is by no means excluded in such analyses.
 
In my own judgment, 
conditions are more likely to be favourable 
in self-observation than in the observation of others;
in any case,  
it is permissible to investigate how much can be accomplished in 
the matter of dream-interpretation by means of self-analysis.

There are other difficulties which must be overcome in my own 
inner self.
One has a comprehensible aversion to exposing so 
many intimate details of one’s own psychic life, 
and one does 
not feel secure against the misinterpretations of strangers.
But 
one must be able to transcend such considerations.
Tout psy ckologiste, 
writes Delbceuf, 
est obligi de jaire Vaveu meme de 
ses faiblesses s’il croit par Id jeter du jour sur quelque problbntc 
obscur And I may assume for the reader that his initial interest 
in the indiscretions which I must commit will very soon give way 
to an exclusive engrossment in the psychological problems elucidated by them. 

I shall therefore select one of my own dreams for the purpose 
of elucidating my method of interpretation.

Every such dream 
necessitates a preliminary statement;
so that I must now beg the 
reader to make my interests his own for a time, 
and to become 
absorbed, 
with me, 
in the most trifling details of my life;
for an 
interest in the hidden significance of dreams imperatively demands just such a transference.
 
In the summer of 1895 1 had treated psycho-analytically a young 
lady who was an intimate friend of mine and of my family.

It 
will be understood that such complicated relations may excite 
manifold feelings in the physician, 
and especially the psychotherapist.

The personal interest of the physician is greater, 
but his 
authority less.

If he fails, 
his friendship with the patient’s relatives is in danger of being undermined.
In this case, 
however,  
the treatment ended in partial success;
the patient was cured of 
her hysterical anxiety, 
but not of all her somatic symptoms.

At 
that time I was not yet quite sure of the criteria which denote 
the final cure of an hysterical case, 
and I expected her to accept 
a solution which did not seem acceptable to her.

In the midst of 
this disagreement we discontinued the treatment for the summer 
holidays.

One day a younger colleague, 
one of my most intimate 
friends, 
who had visited the patient — Irma — and her family in 
their country residence, 
called upon me.

I asked him how Irma 
was, 
and received the reply: She is better, 
but not quite well.
 
I realize that these words of my friend Otto’s, 
or the tone of voice 
in which they were spoken, 
annoyed me.

I thought I heard a reproach in the words, 
perhaps to the effect that I had promised 
the patient too much, 
and — rightly or wrongly — I attributed 
Otto’s apparent taking sides against me to the influence of the 
patient’s relatives, 
who, 
I assumed, 
had never approved of my 
treatment.

This disagreeable impression, 
however, 
did not become clear to me, 
nor did I speak of it.

That same evening I wrote 
the clinical history of Irma’s case, 
in order to give it, 
as though 
to justify myself, 
to Dr M,
a mutual friend, 
who was at that 
time the leading personality in our circle.

During the night
or rather in the early morning
I had the following dream, 
which I 
recorded immediately after waking:
Dream of July 23-24, 
1895 
A great hall — 
a number of guests, 
whom we are receiving — 
among them Irma, 
whom I immediately take aside, 
as though to 
answer her letter, 
and to reproach her for not yet accepting the 
solution  I say to her: If you still have pains, 
it is really only 
your own fault  — 
She answers: If you only knew what pains 
I have now in the throat, 
stomach, 
and abdomen— 
I am choked 
by them.

I am startled, 
and look at her.

She looks pale and 
This is the first dream which I subjected to an exhaustive interpretation.
 
puffy
think that after all I must be overlooking some organic 
affection.
I take her to the window and look into her throat.

She 
offers some, 
resistance to this, 
like, 
a woman who has a set of false 
teeth .

I think, 
surely, 
she, 
doesn’t need them.

The mouth then 
opens wide,  
and I find a large white spot on the right, 
and elsewhere 1 sec extensive, 
grayish-white scabs adhering to curiously 
curled formations, 
which are evidently shaped like the turbinal 
bones of the
nose.

I quickly call Dr M, 
who repeats the examination and confirms it.
Dr M looks quite unlike his usual self;
he is very pale, 
he limps, 
and his chin is clean-shaven.
 
Now my friend Otto, 
too, 
is standing beside her, 
and my friend 
Leopold percusses her covered chest, 
and says: She has a dullness below, 
on the left, 
and also calls attention to an infiltrated 
portion of skin on the left shoulder ( which I can feel, 
in spite of 
the dress).
M says:  There’s no doubt that it’s an infection,  
but it doesn’t matter;
dysentery will follow and the poison will 
be eliminated.

We know, 
too, 
precisely how the infection 
originated.

My friend Otto, 
not long ago, 
gave her, 
when she was 
feeling unwell, 
an injection of a preparation of propyl,
propyls, 
propionic acid, 
trimelhylamin, 
the formula of which I see before me, 
printed in heavy type.

One doesn’t give 
such injections so rashly, 
Probably, 
too, 
the syringe was not 
clean.
 
This dream has an advantage over many others.

It is at once 
obvious to what events of the preceding day it is related, 
and of 
what subject it treats.

The preliminary statement explains these 
matters.

The news of Inna’s health which I had received from 
Otto, 
and the clinical history, 
which I was writing late into the 
night, 
had occupied my psychic activities even during sleep.
 
Nevertheless, 
no one who had read the preliminary report, 
and 
had knowledge of the content of the dream, 
could guess what 
the dream signified.

Nor do I myself know.

I am puzzled by the 
morbid symptoms of which Irma complains in the dream, 
for 
they are not the symptoms for which I treated her.

I smile at 
the nonsensical idea of an injection of propionic acid, 
and at Dr M’s attempt at consolation.

Towards the end the dream seems 
more obscure and quicker in tempo than at the beginning.

In 
order to learn the significance of all these details I resolve to 
undertake an exhaustive analysis.
 
The hall — a number of guests, 
whom we arc receiving.
We were 
living that summer at Bellevue, 
an isolated house on one of the 
hills adjoining the Kahlenberg.
This house was originally built 
as a place of entertainment, 
and therefore has unusually lofty, 
hall-lilce rooms.

The dream was dreamed in Bellevue, 
a few days 
before my wife’s birthday.

During the day my wife had mentioned that she expected several friends, 
and among them Irma, 
 to come to us as guests for her birthday.

My dream, 
then, 
anticipates this situation: It is my wife’s birthday, 
and we are receiving a number of people, 
among them Irma, 
as guests in the 
large hall of Bellevue. 
 
I reproach Irma for not having accepted the solution, 
I say, 
If you still have pains, 
it is really your own fault I might even 
have said this while awake;
I may have actually said it.

At that 
time I was of the opinion recognized (later to be incorrect) that 
my task was limited to informing patients of the hidden meaning 
of their symptoms.

Whether they then accepted or did not accept 
the solution upon which success depended — for that I was not 
responsible.

I am grateful to this error, 
which, 
fortunately, 
has 
now been overcome, 
since it made life easier for me at a time 
when, 
with all my unavoidable ignorance, 
I was expected to effect 
successful cures.

But I note that in the speech which I make to 
Irma in the dream I am above all anxious that I shall not be 
blamed for the pains which she still sufiers.

If it is Irma’s own 
fault, 
it cannot be mine.

Should the purpose of the dream be 
looked for in this quarter? 

Irma's complaints —
pains in the neck, 
abdomen, 
and stomach;
she is choked by them.

Pains in the stomach belonged to the 
symptom-complex of my patient, 
but they were not very prominent;
she complained rather of qualms and a feeling of nausea.
 
Pains in the neck and abdomen and constriction of the throat 
played hardly any part in her case.

I wonder why I have decided 
upon this choice of symptoms in the dream;
for the moment I 
cannot discover the reason.

She looks pale and puffy.

My patient had always a rosy complexion.

I suspect that here another person is being substituted 
for her.

I am startled at the idea that I may have overlooked some or ganic affection.

This, 
as the reader will readily believe, 
is a constant fear with the specialist who sees neurotics almost exclusively, 
and who is accustomed to ascribe to hysteria so many
manifestations which other physicians treat as organic.

On the other 
hand, 
I am haunted by a faint doubt — I do not know whence 
it comes — -whether my alarm is altogether honest.

If Irma’s pains 
are indeed of organic origin, 
it is not my duty to cure them.

My treatment, 
of course, 
removes only hysterical pains.

It seems to me, 
in fact, 
that I wish to find an error in the diagnosis;
for then 
I could not be reproached with failure to effect a cure.
 
I take her to the window in order to look into her throat. 
She resists a little, 
like a woman who has false teeth.
I think to myself, 
 
she does not need them.
I had never had occasion to inspect 
Irma’s oral cavity.

The incident in the dream reminds me of an 
examination, 
made some time before, 
of a governess who at first 
produced an impression of youthful beauty, 
but who, 
upon opening her mouth, 
took certain measures to conceal her denture.
 
Other memories of medical examinations, 
and of petty secrets 
revealed by them, 
to the embarrassment of both physician and 
patient, 
associate themselves with this case.

She surely does 
not need them, 
is perhaps in the first place a compliment to 
Irma;
but I suspect yet another meaning.

In a careful analysis 
one is able to feel whether or not the arriere-pensees which are 
to be expected have all been exhausted.

The way in which Irma 
stands at the window suddenly reminds me of another experience.
 
Irma has an intimate woman friend of whom I think very highly.
 
One evening, 
on paying her a visit, 
I found her at the window in 
the position reproduced in the dream, 
and her physician, 
the same Dr M,
declared that she had a diphtheritic membrane.
 
The person of Dr M
and the membrane return, 
indeed, 
in the 
course of the dream.

Now it occurs to me that during the past 
few months I have had every reason to suppose that this lady too 
is hysterical.

Yes, 
Irma herself betrayed the fact to me.