THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 




The 

Interpretation 
of Dreams 


By Sigmund Freud 


Translated by Dr. A. A. Brill 


Carlton House 



JVew York 



All rights reserved 


MANUFACTURED IN TUB UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 



CONTENTS 


PAGE 


FOREWORD V 

I. The Scientific Literature of Dream-Problems 3 

(Up to 1900) 

II. The Method of Dream-Interpretation 8 

III. The Dream as Wish-Fulfilment 33 

IV, Distortion in Dreams 44 

V. The Material and Sources of Dreams 70 

VI. The Dream-Work 174 

VII. The Psychology of the Dream-Processes 368 




FOREWORD 


In 1909, G. Stanley Hall invited me to Clark University*; 
in Worcester, to give the first lectures on psychoanalysis. In 
the same year, Dr. Brill published the first of his transla- 
tions of my writings, which were soon followed by further 
ones. If psychoanalysis now plays a role in American intel- 
lectual life, or if it does so in the future, a large part of this 
result will have to be attributed to this and other activities 
of Dr. Brill's. 

His first translation of The Interpretation of Dreams ap- 
peared in 1913. Since then, much has taken place in the 
world, and much has been changed in our views about the 
neuroses. This book, with the new contribution to psychol- 
ogy which surprised the world when it was published 
(1900), remains essentially unaltered. It contains, even ac- 
cording to my present-day judgment, the most valuable of 
all the discoveries it has been my good fortune to make. 
Insight such as this falls to one’s lot but once in a lifetime. 


Vienna . 
March ij, 


FRETJD 




THE INTERPRETATION 
OF DREAMS 

**. Fledere si nequeo Superos, Acheronta movebo 




THE SCIENTIFIC LITERA TURE OF 


DREAM-PROBLEMS (UP TO 1900 ) 


In the following pages, I shall demonstrate that there is a 
psychological technique which makes it possible to interpret 
dreams, and that on the application of this technique, every 
dream will reveal itself as a psychological structure, full of sig- 
nificance, and one which may be assigned to a specific place in 
the psychic activities of the waking state. Further, I shall en- 
deavor to elucidate the processes which underlie the strangeness 
and obscurity of dreams, and to deduce from these processes the 
nature of the psychic forces whose conflict or co-operation is re- 
sponsible for our dreams. This done, my investigation will ter- 
minate, as it will have reached the point where the problem of 
the dream merges into more comprehensive problems, and to 
solve these, we must have recourse to material of a different kind. 

I shall begin by giving a short account of the views of earlier 
writers on this subject and of the status of the dream-problem 
in contemporary science; since in the course of this treatise, I 
shall not often have occasion to refer to either. In spite of thou- 
sands of years of endeavor, little progress has been made in the 
scientific understanding of dreams. This fact has been so univer- 
sally acknowledged by previous writers on the subject that it 
seems hardly necessary to quote individual opinions. The reader 
will find, in many stimulating observations, and plenty of inter- 
esting material relating to our subject, but little or nothing that 
concerns the true nature of the dream, or that solves definitely 

3 



4 


THE INTERPRETATION OR DREAMS 


any of its enigmas. The educated layman, of course, knows even 
less of the matter. 

The conception of the dream that was held in prehistoric ages 
by primitive peoples, and the influence which it may have ex- 
erted on the formation of their conceptions of the universe, and 
of the soul, is a theme of such great interest that it is only with 
reluctance that I refrain from dealing with it in these pages. I 
will refer the reader to the well-known works of Sir John Lub- 
bock (Lord Avebury), Herbert Spencer, E. B. Tylor and other 
writers; I will only add that we shall not realize the importance 
of these problems and speculations until we have completed 
the task of dream interpretation that lies before us. 

A reminiscence of the concept of the dream that was held in 
primitive times seems to underlie the evaluation of the dream 
which was current among the peoples of classical antiquity . 1 
They took it for granted that dreams were related to the world 
of the supernatural beings in whom they believed, and that they 
brought inspirations from the gods and demons. Moreover, it 
appeared to them that dreams must serve a special purpose in 
respect of the dreamer; that, as a rule, they predicted the future. 
The extraordinary variations in the content of dreams, and in 
the impressions which they produced on the dreamer, made it, of 
course, very difficult to formulate a coherent conception of them, 
and necessitated manifold differentiations and group-formations, 
according to their value and reliability. The valuation of dreams 
by the individual philosophers of antiquity naturally depended 
on the importance which they were prepared to attribute to 
manticism in general. 

In the two works of Aristotle in which there is mention of 
dreams, they are already regarded as constituting a problem of 
psychology. We are told that the dream is not god-sent, that 
it is not of divine but of daimonic origin. For nature is really 
daimonic, not divine; that is to say, the dream is not a super- 
natural revelation, but is subject to the laws of the human spirit, 
which has, of course, a kinship with the divine. The dream is 
defined as the psychic activity of the sleeper, inasmuch as he is 

1 The following remarks are based on Buchsenschutz’s careful essay, Traum 
nnd Traumdeutung im Altertum (Berlin, 1868) . 



DREAM-PROBLEMS 


5 

asleep. Aristotle was acquainted with some of the characteristics 
of the dream-life; for example, he knew that a dream converts 
the slight sensations perceived in sleep into intense sensations 
(“one imagines that one is walking through fire, and feels hot, 
if this or that part of the body becomes only quite slightly 
warm”), which led him to conclude that dreams might easily 
betray to the physician the first indications of an incipient physi- 
cal change which escaped observation during the day . 2 

As has been said, those writers of antiquity who preceded 
Aristotle did not regard the dream as a product of the dreaming 
psyche, but as an inspiration of divine origin, and in ancient 
times, the two opposing tendencies which we shall find through- 
out the ages in respect of the evaluation of the dream-life, were 
already perceptible. The ancients distinguished between the 
true and valuable dreams which were sent to the dreamer as 
warnings, or to foretell future events, and the vain, fraudulent 
and empty dreams, whose object was to misguide him or lead him 
to destruction. 

The pre-scientific conception of the dream which obtained 
among the ancients was, of course, in perfect keeping with their 
general conception of the universe, which was accustomed to 
project as an external reality that which possessed reality only 
in the life of the psyche. Further, it accounted for the main 
impression made upon the waking life by the morning memory 
of the dream; for in this memory the dream, as compared with 
the rest of the psychic content, seems to be something alien, 
coming, as it were, from another world. It would be an error to 
suppose that the theory of the supernatural origin of dreams 
lacks followers even in our own times; for quite apart from 
pietistic and mystical writers — who cling, as they are perfectly 
justified in doing, to the remnants of the once predominant 
realm of the supernatural until these remnants have been swept 
away by scientific explanation — we not infrequently find that 
quite intelligent persons, who in other respects are averse to 
anything of a romantic nature, go so far as to base their religious 
belief in the existence and co-operation of superhuman spiritual 

2 The relationship between dreams and disease is discussed by Hippocrates 
in a chapter of his famous work. 



6 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


powers on the inexplicable nature of the phenomena of dreams 
(Haffner). The validity ascribed to the dream life by certain 
schools of philosophy — for example, by the school of Schelling — 
is a distinct reminiscence of the undisputed belief in the divinity 
of dreams which prevailed in antiquity; and for some thinkers, 
the mantic or prophetic power of dreams is still a subject of 
debate. This is due to the fact that the explanations attempted 
by psychology are too inadequate to cope with the accumulated 
material, however strongly the scientific thinker may feel that 
such superstitious doctrines should be repudiated. 

To write a history of our scientific knowledge of the dream 
problem is extremely difficult, because, valuable though this 
knowledge may be in certain respects, no real progress in a defi- 
nite direction is as yet discernible. No real foundation of veri- 
fied results has hitherto been established on which future inves- 
tigators might continue to build. Every new author approaches 
the same problems afresh, and from the very beginning. If I 
were to enumerate such authors in chronological order, giving a 
survey of the opinions which each has held concerning the prob- 
lems of the dream, I should be quite unable to draw a clear and 
complete picture of the present state of our knowledge on the 
subject. I have therefore preferred to base my method of treat- 
ment on themes rather than on authors, and in attempting the 
solution of each problem of the dream, I shall cite the material 
found in the literature of the subject. 

But as I have not succeeded in mastering the whole of this lit- 
erature — for it is widely dispersed and interwoven with the lit- 
erature of other subjects — I must ask my readers to rest content 
with my survey as it stands, provided that no fundamental fact 
or important point of view has been overlooked. 

In a supplement to a later German edition, the author adds: 

I shall have to justify myself for not extending my summary 
of the literature of dream problems to cover the period between 
first appearance of this book and the publication of the second 
edition. This justification may not seem very satisfactory to the 
reader; none the less, to me it was decisive. The motives which 
induced me to summarize the treatment of dreams in the liter- 



DREAM-PROBLEMS 


7 

ature of the subject have been exhausted by the foregoing intro- 
duction; to have continued this would have cost me a great deal 
of effort and would not have been particularly useful or instruc- 
tive. For the interval in question — a period of nine years — has 
yielded nothing new or valuable as regards the conception of 
dreams, either in actual material or in novel points of view. In 
most of the literature which has appeared since the publication 
of my own work, the latter has not been mentioned or discussed; 
it has, of course, received the least attention from the so-called 
“research workers on dreams,” who have thus afforded a bril- 
liant example of the aversion to learning anything new so char- 
acteristic of the scientist. “Les savants ne sont pas curieux," 
said the scoffer, Anatole France. If there were such a thing in 
science as the right of revenge, I, in my turn, should be justified 
in ignoring the literature which has appeared since the publica- 
tion of this book. The few reviews which have appeared in the 
scientific journals are so full of misconceptions and lack of com- 
prehension that my only possible answer to my critics would be 
a request that they should read this book over again — or perhaps 
merely that they should read it I 

And in a supplement to the fourth German edition which ap- 
peared in 1914, a year after I published the first English transla- 
tion of this work, he writes: 

Since then, the state of affairs has certainly undergone a 
change; my contribution to the “interpretation of dreams” is no 
longer ignored in the literature of the subject. But the new situ- 
ation makes it even more impossible to continue the foregoing 
summary. The Interpretation of Dreams has evoked a whole 
series of new contentions and problems, which have been ex- 
pounded by the authors in the most varied fashions. But I 
cannot discuss these works until I have developed the theories to 
which their authors have referred. Whatever has appeared to me 
as valuable in this recent literature, I have accordingly reviewed 
in the course of the following exposition. 



•II- 

THE METHOD OF 
DREAM INTERPRETATION 


THE ANALYSIS OF A SPECIMEN DKEAM 

The epigraph on the title-page of this volume indicates the tra- 
dition to which I prefer to ally myself in my conception of the 
dream. I am proposing to show that dreams are capable of inter- 
pretation; and any contributions to the solution of the problem 
which have already been discussed will emerge only as possible 
by-products in the accomplishment of my special task. On the 
hypothesis that dreams are susceptible of interpretation, I at 
once find myself in disagreement with the prevailing doctrine of 
dreams — in fact, with all the theories of dreams, excepting only 
that of Schemer, for “to interpret a dream,” is to specify its 
“meaning,” to replace it by something which takes its position 
in the concatenation of our psychic activities as a link of definite 
importance and value. But, as we have seen, the scientific theories 
of the dream leave no room for a problem of dream-interpreta- 
tion; since, in the first place, according to these theories, dream- 
ing is not a psychic activity at all, but a somatic process which 
makes itself known to the psychic apparatus by means of sym- 
bols. Lay opinion has always been opposed to these theories. It 
asserts its privilege of proceeding illogically, and although it 
admits that dreams are incomprehensible and absurd, it cannot 
summon up the courage to deny that dreams have any signifi- 
cance. Led by a dim intuition, it seems rather to assume that 
dreams have a meaning, albeit a hidden one; that they are in- 

8 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 


9 

tended as a substitute for some other thought-process, and that 
we have only to disclose this substitute correctly in order to 
discover the hidden meaning of the dream. 

The unscientific world, therefore, has always endeavored to 
“interpret” dreams, and by applying one or the other of two 
essentially different methods. The first of these methods envis- 
ages the dream-content as a whole, and seeks to replace it by 
another content, which is intelligible and in certain respects an- 
alogous. This is symbolic dream-interpretation; and of course it 
goes to pieces at the very outset in the case of those dreams 
which are not only unintelligible but confused. The construction 
which the biblical Joseph placed upon the dream of Pharaoh fur- 
nishes an example of this method. The seven fat ldne, after which 
came seven lean ones that devoured the former, were a symbolic 
substitute for seven years of famine in the land of Egypt, which 
according to the prediction were to consume all the surplus that 
seven fruitful years had produced. Most of the artificial dreams 
contrived by the poets 1 are intended for some such symbolic in- 
terpretation, for they reproduce the thought conceived by the 
poet in a guise not unlike the disguise which we are wont to find 
in our dreams. 

The idea that the dream concerns itself chiefly with the future, 
whose form it surmises in advance — a relic of the prophetic sig- 
nificance with which dreams were once invested — now becomes 
the motive for translating into the future the meaning of the 
dream which has been found by means of symbolic interpreta- 
tion. 

A demonstration of the manner in which one arrives at such a 
symbolic interpretation cannot, of course, be given. Success re- 
mains a matter of ingenious conjecture, of direct intuition, and 

1 In a novel Gradiva, by the poet, W. Jensen, I chanced to discover several 
fictitious dreams, which were perfectly correct in their construction, and 
could be interpreted as though they had not been invented, but had been 
dreamt by actual persons. The poet declared, upon my inquiry, that he was 
unacquainted with my theory of dreams. I have made use of this agreement 
between my investigations and the creations of the poet as a proof of the 
correctness of my method of dream-analysis (Der Wahn und die Trdume in 
W. Jensen’s Gradiva , vol. i of the Schriften zur angewandten Seelenkunde, 
1906, edited by myself, Ges. Schriften , vol. ix) . 



10 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


for this reason dream-interpretation has naturally been elevated 
into an art which seems to depend upon extraordinary gifts . 2 The 
second of the two popular methods of dream-interpretation en- 
tirely abandons such claims. It might be described as the “cipher 
method , 73 since it treats the dream as a kind of secret code in 
which every sign is translated into another sign of known mean- 
ing, according to an established key. For example, I have dreamt 
of a letter, and also of a funeral or the like; I consult a “dream- 
book , 33 and I find that “letter ' 3 is to be translated by “vexation 33 
and “funeral 33 by “engagement . 33 It now remains to establish 
a connection, which I am again to assume as pertaining to the 
future, by means of the rigmarole which I have deciphered. An 
interesting variant of this cipher procedure, a variant in which 
its character of purely mechanical transference is to a certain 
extent corrected, is presented in the work on dream-interpreta- 
tion by Artemidoros of Daldis . 3 Here not only the dream-content, 

2 Aristotle expressed himself in this connection by saying that the best in- 
terpreter of dreams is he who can best grasp similarities. For dream-pictures, 
like pictures in water, are disfigured by the motion (of the water), so that 
he hits the target best who is able to recognize the true picture in the dis- 
torted one (Buchsenschiitz, p. 65), 

2 Artemidoros of Daldis, born probably in the beginning of the second cen- 
tury of our calendar, has furnished us with the most complete and careful 
elaboration of dream-interpretation as it existed in the Gracco-Roman 
world. As Gompertz has emphasized, he ascribed great importance to the 
consideration that dreams ought to be interpreted on the basis of observa- 
tion and experience, and he drew a definite line between his own art and 
other methods, which he considered fraudulent. The principle of his art of 
interpretation is, according to Gompertz, identical with that of magic: i.e, 
the principle of association. The thing dreamed meant what it recalled to 
the memory — to the memory, of course, of the dream-interpreter 1 This fact 
-—that the dream may remind the interpreter of various things, and every 
interpreter of different things — leads, of course, to uncontrollable arbitrari- 
ness and uncertainty. The technique which I am about to describe differs 
from that of the ancients in one essential point, namely, in that it imposes 
upon the dreamer himself the work of interpretation. Instead of taking into 
account whatever may occur to the dream-interpreter, it considers only 
what occurs to the dreamer in connection with the dream-element con- 
cerned, According to the recent records of the missionary, Tfinkdjit (An- 
thropos , 19x3), it would seem that the modern dream-interpreters of the 
Orient likewise attribute much importance to the co-operation of the 
dreamer. Of the dream-interpreters among the Mesopotamian Arabs this 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION II 

but also the personality and social position of the dreamer are 
taken into consideration, so that the same dream-content has a 
significance for the rich man, the married man, or the orator, 
which is different from that which applies to the poor man, the 
bachelor, or, let us say, the merchant. The essential point, then, 
in this procedure is that the work of interpretation is not applied 
to the entirety of the dream, but to each portion of the dream- 
content severally, as though the dream were a conglomerate in 
which each fragment calls for special treatment. Incoherent and 
confused dreams are certaintly those that have been responsible 
for the invention of the cipher method . 4 

The worthlessness of both these popular methods of interpre- 
writer relates as follows: “Pour inter pr iter exactement un songe les onirom - 
anciens les plus habiles s’informent de ceux qui les consultent de toutes les 
circonstances qu’ils regardent nScessaires pour la bonne explication . . . . En 
un mot, nos oniromanciens ne laissent aucune circonstance leur ichapper et 
?ie donnent Vinterpritation d&siri avant d'avoir parfaitement saisi et reQU 
toutes les interrogations desirables Among these questions one always finds 
demands for precise information in respect to near relatives (parents, wife, 
’'children) as well as the following formula: habistine in hoc node copulam 
conjugalem ante vel post somnium? — “L’idSe dominante dans Vinter prita - 
tion des songes consiste a expliquer le reve par son oppose.” 

4 Dr. Alfred Robitsek calls my attention to the fact that Oriental dream- 
books, of which ours are pitiful plagiarisms, commonly undertake the in- 
terpretation of dream-elements in accordance with the assonance and simi- 
larity of words. Since these relationships must be lost by translation into 
our language, the incomprehensibility of the equivalents in our popular 
“dr earn -books” is hereby explained. Information as to the extraordinary 
significance of puns and the play upon words in the old Oriental cultures 
may be found in the writings of Hugo Winckler. The finest example of a 
dream-interpretation which has come down to us from antiquity is based 
on a play upon words. Artemidoros relates the following (p. 225) : “But it 
seems to me that Aristandros gave a most happy interpretation to Alex- 
ander of Macedon. When the latter held Tyros encompassed and in a state 
of siege, and was angry and depressed over the great waste of time, he 
dreamed that he saw a Satyr dancing on his shield. It happened that 
Aristandros was in the neighbourhood of Tyros, and in the escort of the 
king, who was waging war on the Syrians. By dividing the word Satyros 
into <rd and n)dos, he induced the king to become more aggressive in the 
siege. And thus Alexander became master of the city.” (Da TMos = thine 
is Tyros.) The dream, indeed, is so intimately connected with verbal ex- 
pression that Ferenczi justly remarks that every tongue has its own dream- 
language. A dream is, as a rule, not to be transulated into other languages. 



12 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

talion does not admit of discussion. As regards the scientific 
treatment of the subject, the symbolic method is limited in its 
application, and is not susceptible of a general exposition. In the 
cipher method everything depends upon whether the “key,” the 
dream-book, is reliable, and for that all guarantees are lacking. 
So that one might be tempted to grant the contention of the 
philosophers and psychiatrists, and to dismiss the problem of 
dream-interpretation as altogether fanciful . 5 

I have, however, come to think differently. I have been forced 
to perceive that here, once more, we have one of those not infre- 
quent cases where an ancient and stubbornly retained popular 
belief seems to have come nearer to the truth of the matter than 
the opinion of modern science. I must insist that the dream actu- 
ally does possess a meaning, and that a scientific method of 
dream-interpretation is possible. I arrived at my knowledge of 
this method in the following manner: 

For years I have been occupied with the resolution of certain 
psychopathological structures — hysterical phobias, obsessional 
ideas, and the like— with therapeutic intentions. I have been so 
occupied, in fact, ever since I heard the significant statement of 
Joseph Breuer, to the effect that in these structures, regarded as 
morbid symptoms, solution and treatment go hand in hand . 5 
Where it has been possible to trace a pathological idea back to 
those elements in the psychic life of the patient to which it owed 
its origin, this idea has crumbled away, and the patient has been 
relieved of it. In view of the failure of our other therapeutic 
efforts, and in the face of the mysterious character of these patho- 
logical conditions, it seemed to me tempting, in spite of all the 
difficulties, to follow the method initiated by Breuer until a 
complete elucidation of the subject had been achieved. I shall 
have occasion elsewhere to give a detailed account of the form 

6 After the completion of my manuscript, a paper by Stumpf came to my 
notice which agrees with my work in attempting to prove that the dream is 
full of meaning and capable of interpretation. But the interpretation is 
undertaken by means of an allegorizing symbolism, and there is no guaran- 
tee that the procedure is generally applicable, 

6 Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses . Monograph series, 
Journ. Nerv. Mental. Dis. Pub. Co. 



THE METHOD OP DREAM INTERPRETATION 13 

which the technique of this procedure has finally assumed, and of 
the results of my efforts. In the course of these psychoanalytic 
studies, I happened upon the question of dream-interpretation. 
My patients, after I had pledged them to inform me of all the 
ideas and thoughts which occurred to them in connection with 
a given theme, related their dreams, and thus taught me that a 
dream may be interpolated in the psychic concatenation, which 
may be followed backwards from a pathological idea into a pa- 
tient’s memory. The next step was to treat the dream itself as a 
symptom, and to apply to it the method of interpretation which 
had been worked out for such symptoms. 

For this a certain psychic preparation on the part of the pa- 
tient is necessary. A twofold effort is made, to stimulate his at- 
tentiveness in respect of his psychic perceptions, and to eliminate 
the critical spirit in which he is ordinarily in the habit of view- 
ing such thoughts as come to the surface. For the purpose of self- 
observation with concentrated attention it is advantageous that 
the patient should take up a restful position and close his eyes; 
he must be explicitly instructed to renounce all criticism of the 
thought formations which he may perceive. He must also be 
told that the success of the psychoanalysis depends upon his not- 
ing and communicating everything that passes through his mind, 
and that he must not allow himself to suppress one idea because 
it seems to him unimportant or irrelevant to the subject, or an- 
other because it seems nonsensical. He must preserve an absolute 
impartiality in respect to his ideas; for if he is unsuccessful in 
finding the desired solution of the dream, the obsessional idea, or 
the like, it will be because he permits himself to be critical of 
them. 

I have noticed in the course of my psychoanalytical work that 
the psychological state of a man in an attitude of reflection is 
entirely different from that of a man who is observing his psychic 
processes. In reflection there is a greater play of psychic activity 
than in the most attentive self-observation; this is shown even by 
the tense attitude and the wrinkled brow of the man in a state of 
reflection, as opposed to the mimic tranquillity of the man ob- 
serving himself. In both cases there must be concentrated atten- 
tion, but the reflective man makes use of his critical faculties, 



14 the interpretation op dreams 

with the result that he rejects some of the thoughts which rise into 
consciousness after he has become aware of them, and abruptly 
interrupts others, so that he does not follow the lines of thought 
which they would otherwise open up for him; while in respect of 
yet other thoughts he is able to behave in such a manner that they 
do not become conscious at all — that is to say, they are sup- 
pressed before they are perceived. In self-observation, on the 
other hand, he has but one task — that of suppressing criticism; 
if he succeeds in doing this, an unlimited number of thoughts 
enter his consciousness which would otherwise have eluded his 
grasp. With the aid of the material thus obtained — material 
which is new to the self-observer — it is possible to achieve the in- 
terpretation of pathological ideas, and also that of dream-forma- 
tions. As will be seen, the point is to induce a psychic state which 
is in some degree analogous, as regards the distribution of psychic 
energy (mobile attention), to the state of the mind before falling 
asleep — and also, of course, to the hypnotic state. On falling 
asleep the “undesired ideas” emerge, owing to the slackening of 
a certain arbitrary (and, of course, also critical) action, which 
is allowed to influence the trend of our ideas; we are accustomed 
to speak of fatigue as the reason of this slackening; the merging 
undesired ideas are changed into visual and auditory images. In 
the condition which it utilized for the analysis of dreams and 
pathological ideas, this activity is purposely and deliberately 
renounced, and the psychic energy thus saved (or some part of 
it) is employed in attentively tracking the undesired thoughts 
which now come to the surface — thoughts which retain their 
identity as ideas (in which the condition differs from the state 
of falling asleep) . “ Undesired ideas” are thus changed into “de- 
sired” ones. 

There are many people who do not seem to find it easy to adopt 
the required attitude toward the apparently “freely rising” ideas, 
and to renounce the criticism which is otherwise applied to them. 
The “undesired ideas” habitually evoke the most violent resist- 
ance, which seeks to prevent them from coming to the surface. 
But if we may credit our great poet-philosopher Friedrich Schil- 
ler, the essential condition of poetical creation includes a very 
similar attitude. In a certain passage in his correspondence with 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 1 5 

Korner (for the tracing of which we are indebted to Otto Rank) , 
Schiller replies in the following words to a friend who complains 
of his lack of creative power: “The reason for your complaint 
lies, it seems to me, in the constraint which your intellect imposes 
upon your imagination. Here I will make an observation, and 
illustrate it by an allegory. Apparently it is not good — and in- 
deed it hinders the creative work of the mind — if the intellect 
examines too closely the ideas already pouring in, as it were, at 
the gates. Regarded in isolation, an idea may be quite insignifi- 
cant, and venturesome in the extreme, but it may acquire im- 
portance from an idea which follows it; perhaps, in a certain col- 
location with other ideas, which may seem equally absurd, it may 
be capable of furnishing a very serviceable link. The intellect 
cannot judge all these ideas unless it can retain them until it has 
considered them in connection with these other ideas. In the case 
of a creative mind, it seems to me, the intellect has withdrawn its 
watchers from the gates, and the ideas rush in pell-mell, and only 
then does it review and inspect the multitude. You worthy crit- 
ics, or whatever you may call yourselves, are ashamed or afraid 
of the momentary and passing madness which is found in all 
real creators, the longer or shorter duration of which distin- 
guishes the thinking artist from the dreamer. Hence your com- 
plaints of unfruitfulness, for you reject too soon and discriminate 
too severely” (letter of December i, 1788). 

And yet, such a withdrawal of the watchers from the gates of 
the intellect, as Schiller puts it, such a translation into the condi- 
tion of uncritical self-observation, is by no means difficult. 

Most of my patients accomplish it after my first instructions, 
1 myself can do so very completely, if I assist the process by writ- 
ing down the ideas that flasli through my mind. The quantum 
of psychic energy by which the critical activity is thus reduced, 
and by which the intensity of self-observation may be increased, 
varies considerably according to the subject-matter upon which 
the attention is to be fixed. 

The first step in the application of this procedure teaches us 
that one cannot make the dream as a whole the object of one’s 
attention, but only the individual components of its content. 
If I ask a patient who is as yet unpractised: “What occurs to you 



l6 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


in connection with this dream ? ” he is unable, as a rule, to fix upon 
anything in his psychic field of vision. I must first dissect the 
dream for him; then, in connection with each fragment, he gives 
me a number of ideas which may be described as the “thoughts 
behind” this part of the dream. In this first and important condi- 
tion, then, the method of dream-interpretation which I employ 
diverges from the popular, historical and legendary method of 
interpretation by symbolism and approaches more nearly to the 
second or “cipher method.” Like this, it is an interpretation in 
detail, not en masse; like this, it conceives the dream, from tire 
outset, as something built up, as a conglomerate of psychic for- 
mations. 

In the course of my psychoanalysis of neurotics I have already 
subjected perhaps more than a thousand dreams to interpreta- 
tion, but I do not wish to use this material now as an introduc- 
tion to the theory and technique of dream-interpretation. For 
quite apart from the fact that I should lay myself open to the 
objection that these are the dreams of neuropaths, so that the 
conclusions drawn from them would not apply to the dreams of 
healthy persons, there is another reason that impels me to reject 
them. The theme to which these dreams point is, of course, al- 
ways the history of the malady that is responsible for the neu- 
rosis. Hence every dream would require a very long introduc- 
tion, and an investigation of the nature and etiological conditions 
of the psychoneuroses, matters which are in themselves novel 
and exceedingly strange, and which would therefore distract at- 
tention from the dream-problem proper. My purpose is rather 
to prepare the way, by the solution of the dream-problem, for 
the solution of the more difficult problems of the psychology of 
the neuroses. But if I eliminate the dreams of neurotics, which 
constitute my principal material, I cannot be too fastidious in 
my treatment of the rest. Only those dreams are left which have 
been incidentally related to me by healthy persons of my ac- 
quaintance, or which I find given as examples in the literature 
of dream-life. Unfortunately, in all these dreams I am deprived 
of the analysis without which I cannot find the meaning of the 
dream. My mode of procedure is, of course, less easy than tha t of 
the popular cipher method, which translates the given dream- 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 1 7 

content by reference to an established key; I, on the contrary, 
hold that the same dream-content may conceal a different 
meaning in the case of different persons, or in different connec- 
tions. I must, therefore, resort to my own dreams as a source of 
abundant and convenient material, furnished by a person who 
is more or less normal, and containing references to many inci- 
dents of everyday life. I shall certainly be confronted with doubts 
as to the trustworthiness of these “self-analyses,” and it will be 
said that arbitrariness is by no means excluded in such analyses. 
In my own judgment, conditions are more likely to be favourable 
in self-observation than in the observation of others ; in any case, 
it is permissible to investigate how much can be accomplished in 
the matter of dream-interpretation by means of self-analysis. 
There are other difficulties which must be overcome in my own 
inner self. One has a comprehensible aversion to exposing so 
many intimate details of one’s own psychic life, and one does 
not feel secure against the misinterpretations of strangers. But 
one must be able to transcend such considerations. " Tout psy - 
ckologiste,” writes Delbceuf, “est obligi de jaire Vaveu meme de 
ses faiblesses s’il croit par Id jeter du jour sur quelque problbntc 
obscur” And I may assume for the reader that his initial interest 
in the indiscretions which I must commit will very soon give way 
to an exclusive engrossment in the psychological problems elu- 
cidated by them. 7 

I shall therefore select one of my own dreams for the purpose 
of elucidating my method of interpretation. Every such dream 
necessitates a preliminary statement; so that I must now beg the 
reader to make my interests his own for a time, and to become 
absorbed, with me, in the most trifling details of my life; for an 
interest in the hidden significance of dreams imperatively de- 
mands just such a transference. 

PRELIMINARY STATEMENT 

In the summer of 1895 1 had treated psycho-analytically a young 
lady who was an intimate friend of mine and of my family. It 
7 However, I will not omit to mention, in qualification of the above state- 
ment, that I have practically never reported a complete interpretation of a 
dream of my own. And I was probably right not to trust too far to the 
reader’s discretion. 



1 8 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

will be understood that such complicated relations may excite 
manifold feelings in the physician, and especially the psychother- 
apist. The personal interest of the physician is greater, but his 
authority less. If he fails, his friendship with the patient’s rela- 
tives is in danger of being undermined. In this case, however, 
the treatment ended in partial success; the patient was cured of 
her hysterical anxiety, but not of all her somatic symptoms. At 
that time I was not yet quite sure of the criteria which denote 
the final cure of an hysterical case, and I expected her to accept 
a solution which did not seem acceptable to her. In the midst of 
this disagreement we discontinued the treatment for the summer 
holidays. One day a younger colleague, one of my most intimate 
friends, who had visited the patient — Irma — and her family in 
their country residence, called upon me. I asked him how Irma 
was, and received the reply: “She is better, but not quite well.” 
I realize that these words of my friend Otto’s, or the tone of voice 
in which they were spoken, annoyed me. I thought I heard a re- 
proach in the words, perhaps to the effect that I had promised 
the patient too much, and — rightly or wrongly — I attributed 
Otto’s apparent “taking sides” against me to the influence of the 
patient’s relatives, who, I assumed, had never approved of my 
treatment. This disagreeable impression, however, did not be- 
come clear to me, nor did I speak of it. That same evening I wrote 
the clinical history of Irma’s case, in order to give it, as though 
to justify myself, to Dr. M., a mutual friend, who was at that 
time the leading personality in our circle. During the night (or 
rather in the early morning) I had the following dream, which I 
recorded immediately after waking: — 8 

Dream of July 23-24, 1895 

A great hall — a number of guests, whom we are receiving — 
among them Irma, whom I immediately take aside, as though to 
answer her letter, and to reproach her for not yet accepting the 
“ solution ” I say to her: “If you still have pains, it is really only 
your own fault ” — She answers: “If you only knew what pains 
I have now in the throat, stomach, and abdomen— I am choked 
by them.” I am startled, and look at her. She looks pale and 
* Thb is the first dream which I subjected to an exhaustive interpretation. 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 19 

puffy- / think that after all I must be overlooking some organic 
affection. I take her to the window and look into her throat. She 
offers some, resistance to this, like, a woman who has a set of false 
teeth . I think, surely, she, doesn’t need them. — The mouth then 
opens wide,, and I find a large white spot on the right, and else- 
where 1 sec extensive, grayish-white scabs adhering to curiously 
curled formations, which are evidently shaped like the turbinal 
bones of the. nose. — I quickly call Dr. M., who repeats the ex- 
amination and confirms it . . . . Dr. M. looks quite unlike his usual 
self; he is very pale, he limps, and his chin is clean-shaven . . . . 
Now my friend Otto, too, is standing beside her, and my friend 
Leopold percusses her covered chest, and says: “She has a dull- 
ness below, on the left,” and also calls attention to an infiltrated 
portion of skin on the left shoulder ( which I can feel, in spite of 
the dress). . . . M. says: “ There’s no doubt that it’s an infection, 
but it doesn’t matter; dysentery will follow and the poison will 
be eliminated.” . . . We know, too, precisely how the infection 
originated. My friend Otto, not long ago, gave her, when she was 
feeling unwell, an injection of a preparation of propyl . . . pro- 
pyls . . . propionic acid . . . trimelhylamin ( the formula of which 
l see before me, printed in heavy type ). . . . One doesn’t give 
such injections so rashly , . . • Probably, too, the syringe was not 
clean. 

This dream has an advantage over many others. It is at once 
obvious to what events of the preceding day it is related, and of 
what subject it treats. The preliminary statement explains these 
matters. The news of Inna’s health which I had received from 
Otto, and the clinical history, which I was writing late into the 
night, had occupied my psychic activities even during sleep. 
Nevertheless, no one who had read the preliminary report, and 
had knowledge of the content of the dream, could guess what 
the dream signified. Nor do I myself know. I am puzzled by the 
morbid symptoms of which Irma complains in the dream, for 
they are not the symptoms for which I treated her. I smile at 
the nonsensical idea of an injection of propionic acid, and at Dr. 
M.’s attempt at consolation. Towards the end the dream seems 
more obscure and quicker in tempo than at the beginning. In 



20 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


order to learn the significance of all these details I resolve to 
undertake an exhaustive analysis. 

ANALYSIS 

The hall — a number of guests, whom we arc receiving . We were 
living that summer at Bellevue, an isolated house on one of the 
hills adjoining the Kahlenberg. This house was originally built 
as a place of entertainment, and therefore has unusually lofty, 
hall-lilce rooms. The dream was dreamed in Bellevue, a few days 
before my wife’s birthday. During the day my wife had men- 
tioned that she expected several friends, and among them Irma, 
to come to us as guests for her birthday. My dream, then, an- 
ticipates this situation: It is my wife’s birthday, and we are re- 
ceiving a number of people, among them Irma, as guests in the 
large hall of Bellevue . 

I reproach Irma for not having accepted the “solution,” I say , 
“If you still have pains, it is really your own fault” I might even 
have said this while awake; I may have actually said it. At that 
time I was of the opinion recognized (later to be incorrect) that 
my task was limited to informing patients of the hidden meaning 
of their symptoms. Whether they then accepted or did not accept 
the solution upon which success depended — for that I was not 
responsible. I am grateful to this error, which, fortunately, has 
now been overcome, since it made life easier for me at a time 
when, with all my unavoidable ignorance, I was expected to effect 
successful cures. But I note that in the speech which I make to 
Irma in the dream I am above all anxious that I shall not be 
blamed for the pains which she still sufiers. If it is Irma’s own 
fault, it cannot be mine. Should the purpose of the dream be 
looked for in this quarter? 

Irma! s complaints — pains in the neck, abdomen, and stomach; 
she is choked by them . Pains in the stomach belonged to the 
symptom-complex of my patient, but they were not very promi- 
nent; she complained rather of qualms and a feeling of nausea. 
Pains in the neck and abdomen and constriction of the throat 
played hardly any part in her case. I wonder why I have decided 
upon this choice of symptoms in the dream; for the moment I 
cannot discover the reason. 



THE METHOD OP DREAM INTERPRETATION 21 

She looks pale and puffy. My patient had always a rosy com- 
plexion. I suspect that here another person is being substituted 
for her. 

/ am startled at the idea that I may have overlooked some or - 
ganic affection , This, as the reader will readily believe, is a con- 
stant fear with the specialist who sees neurotics almost exclusive- 
ly, and who is accustomed to ascribe to hysteria so many mani- 
festations which other physicians treat as organic. On the other 
hand, I am haunted by a faint doubt — I do not know whence 
it comes — -whether my alarm is altogether honest. If Irma’s pains 
are indeed of organic origin, it is not my duty to cure them. My 
treatment, of course, removes only hysterical pains. It seems to 
me, in fact, that I wish to find an error in the diagnosis; for then 
I could not be reproached with failure to effect a cure. 

I take her to the window in order to look into her throat . She 
resists a little, like a woman who has false teeth. I think to myself , 
she does not need them . I had never had occasion to inspect 
Irma’s oral cavity. The incident in the dream reminds me of an 
examination, made some time before, of a governess who at first 
produced an impression of youthful beauty, but who, upon open- 
ing her mouth, took certain measures to conceal her denture. 
Other memories of medical examinations, and of petty secrets 
revealed by them, to the embarrassment of both physician and 
patient, associate themselves with this case. — “She surely does 
not need them,” is perhaps in the first place a compliment to 
Irma; but I suspect yet another meaning. In a careful analysis 
one is able to feel whether or not the arriere-pensees which are 
to be expected have all been exhausted. The way in which Irma 
stands at the window suddenly reminds me of another experience. 
Irma has an intimate woman friend of whom I think very highly. 
One evening, on paying her a visit, I found her at the window in 
the position reproduced in the dream, and her physician, the 
same Dr, M., declared that she had a diphtheritic membrane. 
The person of Dr. M. and the membrane return, indeed, in the 
course of the dream. Now it occurs to me that during the past 
few months I have had every reason to suppose that this lady too 
is hysterical. Yes, Irma herself betrayed the fact to me. But what 
do I know of her condition? Only the one thing, that like Irma 



22 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


in the dream she suffers from hysterical choking. Thus, in the 
dream I have replaced my patient by her friend. Now I remem- 
ber that I have often played with the supposition that this lady, 
too, might ask me to relieve her of her symptoms. But even at the 
time I thought it improbable since she is extremely reserved. She 
resists, as the dream shows. Another explanation might be that 
she does not need it; in fact, until now she has shown herself 
strong enough to master her condition without outside help. Now 
only a few features remain, which I can assign neither to Irma 
nor to her friend; pale, puffy, false teeth. The false teeth led me 
to the governess; I now feel inclined to be satisfied with bad 
teeth. Here another person, to whom these features may allude, 
occurs to me. She is not my patient, and I do not wish her to be 
my patient, for I have noticed that she is not at her ease with 
me, and I do not consider her a docile patient. She is generally 
pale, and once, when she had not felt particularly well, she was 
puffy. 9 1 have thus compared my patient Irma with two others, 
who would likewise resist treatment. What is the meaning of the 
fact that I have exchanged her for her friend in the dream? Per- 
haps that I wish to exchange her; either her friend arouses in me 
stronger sympathies, or I have a higher regard for her intelli- 
gence. For I consider Irma foolish because she does not accept my 
solution. The other woman would be more sensible, and would 
thus be more likely to yield. The mouth then opens readily; she 
would tell more than Irma. 10 

What I see in the throat: a white spot and scabby turbinal 
bones . The white spot recalls diphtheria, and thus Irma’s friend, 

9 The complaint of pains in the abdomen, as yet unexplained, may also be 
referred to this third person. It is my own wife, of course, who is in ques- 
tion; the abdominal pains remind me of one of the occasions on which her 
shyness became evident to me. I must admit that I do not treat Irma and 
my wife very gallantly in this dream, but let it be said, in my defence, that 
I am measuring both of them against the ideal of the courageous and docile 
female patient. 

10 1 suspect that the interpretation of this portion has not been carried far 
enough to follow every hidden meaning. If I were to continue the compari- 
son of the three women, I should go far afield. Every dream has at least one 
point at which it is unfathomable ; a central point, as it were, connecting 
it with the unknown. 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 23 

but it also recalls the grave illness of my eldest daughter two 
years earlier, and all the anxiety of that unhappy time. The 
scab on the turbinal bones reminds me of my anxiety concerning 
my own health. At that time I frequently used cocaine in order to 
suppress distressing swellings in the nose, and I had heard a few 
days previously that a lady patient who did likewise had con- 
tracted an extensive necrosis of the nasal mucous membrane. In 
1885 it was I who had recommended the use of cocaine, and I 
had been gravely reproached in consequence. A dear friend, who 
had died before the date of this dream, had hastened his end by 
the misuse of this remedy. 

I quickly call Dr. M., who refeats the examination. This would 
simply correspond to the position which M. occupied among us. 
But the word “quickly” is striking enough to demand a special 
examination. It reminds me of a sad medical experience. By con- 
tinually prescribing a drug (sulphonal), which at that time was 
still considered harmless, I was once responsible for a condition 
of acute poisoning in the case of a woman patient, and hastily 
turned for assistance to my older and more experienced colleague. 
The fact that I really had this case in mind is confirmed by a 
subsidiary circumstance. The patient, who succumbed to the 
toxic effects of the drug, bore the same name as my eldest daugh- 
ter. I had never thought of this until now; but now it seems to me 
almost like a retribution of fate — as though the substitution of 
persons had to be continued in another sense: this Matilda for 
that Matilda; an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth. It is as 
though I were seeking every opportunity to reproach myself for 
a lack of medical conscientiousness. 

Dr. M. is pale; his chin is shaven, and he limps. Of this so 
much is correct, that his unhealthy appearance often arouses the 
concern of his friends. The other two characteristics must belong 
to another person. An elder brother living abroad occurs to me, 
for he, too, shaves his chin, and if I remember him rightly, the 
M. of the dream bears on the whole a certain resemblance to him. 
And some days previously the news arrived that he was limping 
on account of an arthritic affection of the hip. There must be 
some reason why I fuse the two persons into one in my dream. 



24 the interpretation of dreams 

I remember that, in fact, I was on bad terms with both of them 
for similar reasons. Both had rejected a certain proposal which 
I had recently made them. 

My friend Otto is now standing next to the patient, and my 
friend Leopold examines her and calls attention to a dulncss low 
down on the left side. My friend Leopold also is a physician, and 
a relative of Otto’s. Since the two practise the same speciality, 
fate has made them competitors, so that they are constantly 
being compared with one another. Both of them assisted me for 
years, while I was still directing a public clinic for neurotic 
children. There, scenes like that reproduced in my dream had 
often taken place. While I would be discussing the diagnosis of 
a case with Otto, Leopold would examine the child anew and 
make an unexpected contribution towards our decision. There 
was a difference of character between the two men like that be- 
tween Inspector Brasig and his friend Karl. Otto was remarkably 
prompt and alert; Leopold was slow and thoughtful, but thor- 
ough. If I contrast Otto and the cautious Leopold in the dream 
I do so, apparently, in order to extol Leopold. The comparison 
is like that made above between the disobedient patient Irma 
and her friend, who was believed to be more sensible. I now be- 
come aware of one of the tracks along which the association of 
ideas in the dream proceeds: from the sick child to the children’s 
clinic. Concerning the dulness low on the left side, I have the 
impression that it corresponds with a certain case of which all the 
details were similar, a case in which Leopold impressed me by his 
thoroughness. I thought vaguely, too, of something like a me- 
tastatic affection, but it might also be a reference to the patient 
whom I should have liked to have in Irma’s place. For this lady, 
as far as I can gather, exhibited symptoms which imitated tu- 
berculosis. 

An infiltrated portion of skin on the left shoulder. I know at 
once that this is my own rheumatism of the shoulder, which I 
always feel if I lie awake long at night. The very phrasing of the 
dream sounds ambiguous: “Something which I can feel, as he 
does, in spite of the dress.” “Feel on my own body” is intended. 
Further, it occurs to me how unusual the phrase “infiltrated por- 
tion of skin” sounds. We are accustomed to the phrase: “an in- 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 2 $ 

filtration of the upper posterior left”; this would refer to the 
lungs, and thus, once more, to tuberculosis. 

In spite of the dress . This, to be sure, is only an interpolation. 
At the clinic the children were, of course, examined undressed; 
here we have some contrast to the manner in which adult female 
patients have to be examined. The story used to be told of an 
eminent physician that he always examined his patients through 
their clothes. The rest is obscure to me; I have, frankly, no 
inclination to follow the matter further. 

Dr . M. says: u It’s an infection , but it doesn’t matter ; dysen- 
tery will follow , and the poison wiU be eliminated ” This, at first, 
seems to me ridiculous; nevertheless, like everything else, it 
must be carefully analysed; more closely observd it seems after 
all to have a sort of meaning. What I had found in the patient 
was a local diphtheritis. I remember the discussion about diph- 
theritis and diphtheria at the time of my daughter’s illness. 
Diphtheria is the general infection which proceeds from local 
diphtheritis. Leopold demonstrates the existence of such a 
general infection by the dulness, which also suggests a metastatic 
focus. I believe, however, that just this kind of metastasis does 
not occur in the case of diphtheria. It reminds me rather of 
pyaemia. 

It doesn’t matter is a consolation. I believe it fits in as fol- 
lows: The last part of the dream has yielded a content to the 
effect that the patient’s sufferings are the result of a serious or- 
ganic affection. I begin to suspect that by this I am only trying 
to shift the blame from myself. Psychic treatment cannot be 
held responsible for the continued presence of a diphtheritic 
affection. Now, indeed, I am distressed by the thought of having 
invented such a serious illness for Irma, for the sole purpose of 
exculpating myself. It seems so cruel. Accordingly, I need the 
assurance that the outcome will be benign, and it seems to me 
that I made a good choice when I put the words that consoled me 
into the mouth of Dr. M. But here I am placing myself in a 
position of superiority to the dream; a fact which needs explana- 
tion. 

But why is this consolation so nonsensical? 

Dysentery . Some sort of far-fetched theoretical notion that the 



36 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


toxins of disease might be eliminated through the intestines. Am 
I thereby trying to make fun of Dr. M.’s remarkable store of 
far-fetched explanations, his habit of conceiving curious patho- 
logical relations? Dysentery suggests something else. A few 
months ago I had in my care a young man who was suffering 
from remarkable intestinal troubles; a case which had been 
treated by other colleagues as one of “anaemia with malnutri- 
tion.” I realized that it was a case of hysteria; I was unwilling 
to use my psychotherapy on him, and sent him off on a sea- 
voyage. Now a few days previously I had received a despairing 
letter from him; he wrote from Egypt, saying that he had had a 
fresh attack, which the doctor had declared to be dysentery. I 
suspect that the diagnosis is merely an error on the part of an 
ignorant colleague, who is allowing himself to be fooled by the 
hysteria; yet I cannot help reproaching myself for putting the 
invalid in a position where he might contract some organic affec- 
tion of the bowels in addition to his hysteria. Furthermore, 
dysentery sounds not unlike diphtheria, a word which does not 
occur in the dream. 

Yes, it must be the case that with the consoling prognosis, 
“Dysentery will develop, etc.,” I am making fun of Dr. M., for 
I recollect that years ago he once jestingly told a very similar 
story of a colleague. He had been called in to consult with him 
in the case of a woman who was very seriously ill, and he felt 
obliged to confront his colleague, who seemed very hopeful, with 
the fact that he found albumen in the patient’s urine. His col- 
league, however, did not allow this to worry him, but answered 
calmly: “That does not matter, my dear sir; the albumen will 
soon be excreted!” Thus I can no longer doubt that this part of 
the dream expresses derision for those of my colleagues who are 
ignorant of hysteria. And, as though in confirmation, the thought 
enters my mind: “Does Dr. M. know that the appearances in 
Irma’s friend, his patient, which gave him reason to fear tuber- 
culosis, are likewise due to hysteria? Has he recognized this 
hysteria, or has he allowed himself to be fooled?” 

But what can be my motive in treating this friend so badly? 
That is simple enough: Dr. M. agrees with my solution as little 
as does Irma herself. Thus, in this dream I have already revenged 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 2 7 

myself on two persons: on Irma in the words, “If you still have 
pains, it is your own fault,” and on Dr. M. in the wording of 
the nonsensical consolation which has been put into his mouth. 

We know precisely how the infection originated . This precise 
knowledge in the dream is remarkable. Only a moment before 
this we did not yet know of the infection, since it was first dem- 
onstrated by Leopold. 

My friend Otto gave her an infection not long ago , when she 
was feeling unwell. Otto had actually related during his short 
visit to Irma’s family that he had been called in to a neighbouring 
hotel in order to give an injection to someone who had been 
suddenly taken ill. Injections remind me once more of the un- 
fortunate friend who poisoned himself with cocaine. I had recom- 
mended the remedy for internal use only during the withdrawal 
of morphia; but he immediately gave himself injections of 
cocaine. 

With a preparation of propyl . . . propyls . . . propionic acid . 
How on earth did this occur to me? On the evening of the day 
after I had written the clinical history and dreamed about the 
case, my wife opened a bottle of liqueur labelled “Ananas ,” 11 
which was a present from our friend, Otto. He had, as a matter of 
fact, a habit of making presents on every possible occasion; I 
hope he will some day be cured of this by a wife . 12 This liqueur 
smelt so strongly of fusel oil that I refused to drink it. My wife 
suggested: “We will give the bottle to the servants,” and I, more 
prudent, objected, with the philanthropic remark: “They shan’t 
be poisoned either.” The smell of fusel oil (amyl . . .) has now 
apparently awakened my memory of the whole series: propyl, 
methyl, etc., which furnished the preparation of propyl men- 
tioned in the dream. Here, indeed, I have effected a substitution: 

I dreamt of propyl after smelling amyl; but substitutions of this 
kind are perhaps permissible, especially in organic chemistry. 

II “Ananas,” moreover, has a remarkable assonance with the family name 
of my patient Irma. 

12 In this the dream did not turn out to be prophetic. But in another sense 
it proved correct, for the “unsolved” stomach pains, for which I did not 
want to be blamed, were the forerunners of a serious illness, due to gall- 
stones. 



28 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

Trimethylamin. In the dream I see the chemical formula of 
this substance — which at all events is evidence of a great effort on 
the part of my memory — and the formula is even printed in 
heavy type, as though to distinguish it from the context as 
something of particular importance. And where does trimethy- 
lamin, thus forced on my attention, lead me? To a conversation 
with another friend, who for years has been familiar with all my 
germinating ideas, and I with his. At that time he had just in- 
formed me of certain ideas concerning a sexual chemistry, and 
had mentioned, among others, that he thought he had found in 
trimethylamin one of the products of sexual metabolism. This 
substance thus leads me to sexuality, the factor to which I at- 
tribute the greatest significance in respect of the origin of these 
nervous affections which I am trying to cure. My patient Irma 
is a young widow; if I am required to excuse my failure to cure 
her, I shall perhaps do best to refer to this condition, which her 
admirers would be glad to terminate. But in what a singular 
fashion such a dream is fitted together! The friend who in my 
dream becomes my patient in Irma’s place is likewise a young 
widow. 

I surmise why it is that the formula of trimethylamin is so in- 
sistent in the dream. So many important things are centred about 
this one word: trimethylamin is an allusion, not merely to the 
all-important factor of sexuality, but also to a friend whose sym- 
pathy I remember with satisfaction whenever I feel isolated in 
my opinions. And this friend, who plays such a large part in my 
life: will he not appear yet again in the concatenation of ideas 
peculiar to this dream? Of course; he has a special knowledge of 
the results of affections of the nose and the sinuses, and has 
revealed to science several highly remarkable relations between 
the turbinal bones and the female sexual organs. (The three 
curly formations in Irma’s throat.) I got him to examine Irma, in 
order to determine whether her gastric pains were of nasal origin. 
But he himself suffers from suppurative rhinitis, which gives me 
concern, and to this perhaps there is an allusion in pyaemia, 
which hovers before me in the metastasis of the dream. 

One doesn’t give stick injections so rashly. Here the reproach 
of rashness is hurled directly at my friend Otto. I believe I had 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 29 

some such thought in the afternoon, when he seemed to indicate, 
by word and look, that he had taken sides against me. It was, 
perhaps: “How easily he is influenced; how irresponsibly he 
pronounces judgment.” Further, the above sentence points once 
more to my deceased friend, who so irresponsibly resorted to 
cocaine injections. As I have said, I had not intended that injec- 
tions of the drug should be taken. I note that in reproaching Otto 
I once more touch upon the story of the unfortunate Matilda, 
which was the pretext for the same reproach against me. Here, 
obviously, I am collecting examples of my conscientiousness, 
and also of the reverse. 

Probably too the syringe was not clean . Another reproach 
directed at Otto, but originating elsewhere. On the previous day 
I happened to meet the son of an old lady of eighty-two, to whom 
I am obliged to give two injections of morphia daily. At present 
she is in the country, and I have heard that she is suffering from 
phlebitis. I immediately thought that this might be a case of 
infiltration caused by a dirty syringe. It is my pride that in two 
years I have not given her a single infiltration; I am always 
careful, of course, to see that the syringe is perfectly dean. For 
I am conscientious. From the phlebitis I return to my wife, who 
once suffered from thrombosis during a period of pregnancy, and 
now three related situations come to the surface in my memory, 
involving my wife, Irma, and the dead Matilda, whose identity 
has apparently justified my putting these three persons in one 
another’s places. 

I have now completed the interpretation of the dream . J3 In the 
course of this interpretation I have taken great pains to avoid all 
those notions which must have been suggested by a comparison 
of the dream-content with the dream-thoughts hidden behind 
this content. Meanwhile the “meaning” of the dream has dawned 
upon me. I have noted an intention which is realized through 
the dream, and which must have been my motive in dreaming. 
The dream fulfils several wishes, which were awakened within 
me by the events of the previous evening (Otto’s news, and the 

13 Even if I have not, as might be expected, accounted for everything that 
occurred to me in connection with the work of interpretation. 



THE INTERPRETATION OR DREAMS 


writing of the clinical history). For the result of the dream is, 
that it is not I who am to blame for the pain which Irma is still 
suffering, but that Otto is to blame for it. Now Otto has annoyed 
me by his remark about Inna’s imperfect cure; the dream 
avenges me upon him, in that it turns the reproach upon himself. 
The dream acquits me of responsibility for Irma’s condition, as 
it refers this condition to other causes (which do, indeed, fur- 
nish quite a number of explanations) . The dream represents a 
certain state of affairs, such as I might wish to exist; the content 
of the dream is thus the fulfilment of a wish; its motive is a wish. 

This much is apparent at first sight But many other details of 
the dream become intelligible when regarded from the standpoint 
of wish-fulfilment. I take my revenge on Otto, not merely for 
too readily talcing sides against me, in that I accuse him of 
careless medical treatment (the injection), but I revenge myself 
also for the bad liqueur which smells of fusel oil, and I find an 
expression in the dream which unites both these reproaches: the 
injection of a preparation of propyl. Still I am not satisfied, but 
continue to avenge myself by comparing him with his more 
reliable colleague. Thereby I seem to say: “I like him better 
than you.” But Otto is not the only person who must be made to 
feel the weight of my anger. I take my revenge on the disobedient 
patient, by exchanging her for a more sensible and more docile 
one. Nor do I pass over Dr. M.’s contradiction; for I express, 
in an obvious allusion, my opinion of him: namely, that his atti- 
tude in this case is that, of an ignoramus (“Dysentery will de- 
velop, etc.”). Indeed, it seems as though I were appealing from 
him to someone better informed (my friend, who told me about 
trimethylamin), just as I have turned from Irma to her friend, 
and from Otto to Leopold. It is as though I were to say: Rid me 
of these three persons, replace them by three others of my own 
choice, and I shall be rid of the reproaches which I am not will- 
ing to admit that I deserve! In my dream the unreasonableness 
of these reproaches is demonstrated for me in the most elaborate 
manner. Irma’s pains are not attributable to me, since she her- 
self is to blame for them, in that she refuses to accept my solu- 
tion. They do not concern me, for being as they are of an organic 
nature, they cannot possibly be cured by psychic treatment. — 



THE METHOD OF DREAM INTERPRETATION 3 1 

irma’s sufferings are satisfactorily explained by her widowhood 
(trimethylamin!) ; a state which I cannot alter. — Irma’s illness 
has been caused by an incautious injection administered by Otto, 
an injection of an unsuitable drug, such as I should never have 
administered. — Irma’s complaint is the result of an injection 
made with an unclean syringe, like the phlebitis of my old lady 
patient, whereas my injections have never caused any ill effects. 
I am aware that these explanations of Irma’s illness, which unite 
in acquitting me, do not agree with one another; that they even 
exclude one another. The whole plea — for this dream is nothing 
else — recalls vividly the defence offered by a man who was ac- 
cused by his neighbour of having returned a kettle in a damaged 
condition. In the first place, he said, he had returned the kettle 
undamaged; in the second place it already had holes in it when 
he borrowed it; and in the third place, he had never borrowed it 
at all. A complicated defence, but so much the better; if only 
one of these three lines of defence is recognized as valid, the man 
must be acquitted. 

Still other themes play a part in the dream, and their relation 
to my non-responsibility for Irma’s illness is not so apparent: my 
daughter’s illness, and that of a patient with the same name; the 
harmfulness of cocaine; the affection of my patient, who was 
traveling in Egypt; concern about the health of my wife; my 
brother, and Dr. M.; my own physical troubles, and anxiety 
concerning my absent friend, who is suffering from suppurative 
rhinitis. But if I keep all these things in view, they combine into 
a single train of thought, which might be labelled: concern for 
the health of myself and others; professional conscientiousness. 
I recall a vaguely disagreeable feeling when Otto gave me the 
news of Irma’s condition. Lastly, I am inclined, after the event, to 
find an expression of this fleeting sensation in the train of 
thoughts which forms part of the dream. It is as though Otto had 
said to me: “You do not take your medical duties seriously 
enough; you are not conscientious; you do not perform what 
you promise.” Thereupon this train of thought placed itself at 
my service, in order that I might give proof of my extreme con- 
scientiousness, of my intimate concern about the health of my 
relatives, friends and patients. Curiously enough, there are also 



32 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

some painful memories in this material, which confirm the blame 
attached to Otto rather than my own exculpation. The material 
is apparently impartial, but the connection between this broader 
material, on which the dream is based, and the more limited 
theme from which emerges the wish to be innocent of Irma’s 
illness, is, nevertheless, unmistakable. 

I do not wish to assert that I have entirely revealed the mean- 
ing of the dream, or that my interpretation is flawless. 

I could still spend much time upon it; I could draw further 
explanations from it, and discuss further problems which it 
seems to propound. I can even perceive the points from which 
further mental associations might be traced; but such consid- 
erations as are always involved in every dream of one’s own 
prevent me from interpreting it farther. Those who are over- 
ready to condemn such reserve should make the experiment of 
trying to be more straightforward. For the present I am content 
with the one fresh discovery which has just been made: If the 
method of dream-interpretation here indicated is followed, it 
will be found that dreams do really possess a meaning, and are 
by no means the expression of a disintegrated cerebral activity, 
as the writers on the subject would have us believe. When the 
work of interpretation has been completed the dream can be 
recognized as a wish- fulfilment. 



Ill 


THE DREAM AS A WISH-FULFILMENT 


When, after passing through a narrow defile, one suddenly 
reaches a height beyond which the ways part and a rich prospect 
lies outspread in different directions, it is well to stop for a 
moment and consider whither one shall turn next. We are in 
somewhat the same position after we have mastered this first 
interpretation of a dream. We find ourselves standing in the light 
of a sudden discovery. The dream is not comparable to the irreg- 
ular sounds of a musical instrument, which, instead of being 
played by the hand of a musician, is struck by some external 
force; the dream is not meaningless, not absurd, does not pre- 
suppose that one part of our store of ideas is dormant while 
another part begins to awake. It is a perfectly valid psychic 
phenomenon, actually a wish-fulfilment; it may be enrolled in 
the continuity of the intelligible psychic activities of the waking 
state; it is built up by a highly complicated intellectual activity. 
But at the very moment when we are about to rejoice in this dis- 
covery a host of problems besets us. If the dream, as this theory 
defines it, represents a fulfilled wish, what is the cause of the 
striking and unfamiliar manner in which this fulfilment is ex- 
pressed? What transformation has occurred in our dream- 
thoughts before the manifest dream, as we remember it on wak- 
ing, shapes itself out of them? How has this transformation taken 
place? Whence comes the material that is worked up into the 
dream? What causes many of the peculiarities which are to be 
observed in our dream-thoughts; for example, how is it that they 
are able to contradict one another? (see the analogy of the kettle, 

33 



34 THE interpretation of dreams 

p. 31). Is the dream capable of teaching us something new con- 
cerning our internal psychic processes, and can its content correct 
opinions which we have held during the day? I suggest that for 
the present all these problems be laid aside, and that a single path 
be pursued. We have found that the dream represents a wish as 
fulfilled. Our next purpose should be to ascertain whether this 
is a general characteristic of dreams, or whether it is only the 
accidental content of the particular dream (“the dream about 
Irma’s injection”) with which we have begun our analysis; for 
even if we conclude that every dream has a meaning and psychic 
value, we must nevertheless allow for the possibility that this 
meaning may not be the same in every dream. The first dream 
which we have considered was the fulfilment of a wish; another 
may turn out to be the realization of an apprehension; a third 
may have a reflection as its content; a fourth may simply repro- 
duce a reminiscence. Are there, then, dreams other than wish- 
dreams; or are there none but wish-dreams? 

It is easy to show that the wish-fulfilment in dreams is often un- 
disguised and easy to recognize, so that one may wonder why the 
language of dreams has not long since been understood. There is, 
for example, a dream which I can evoke as often as I please, 
experimentally, as it were. If, in the evening, I eat anchovies, 
olives, or other strongly salted foods, I am thirsty at night, and 
therefore I wake. The waking, however, is preceded by a dream, 
which has always the same content, namely, that I am drinking. 
I am drinking long draughts of water; it tastes as delicious as 
only a cool drink can taste when one’s throat is parched; and 
then I wake, and find that I have an actual desire to drink. The 
cause of this dream is thirst, which I perceive when I wake. From 
this sensation arises the wish to drink, and the dream shows me 
this wish as fulfilled. It thereby serves a function, the nature of 
which I soon surmise. I sleep well, and am not accustomed to 
being waked by a bodily need. If I succeed in appeasing my 
thirst by means of the dream that I am drinking, I need not wake 
up in order to satisfy that thirst. It is thus a dream of con- 
venience. The dream takes the place of action, as elsewhere in 
life. Unfortunately, the need of water to quench the thirst cannot 



THE DREAM AS A WISH-FULFILMENT 35 

be satisfied by a dream, as can my thirst for revenge upon Otto 
and Dr. M., but the intention is the same. Not long ago I had 
the same dream in a somewhat modified form. On this occasion 
I felt thirsty before going to bed, and emptied the glass of water 
which stood on the little chest beside my bed. Some hours later, 
during the night, my thirst returned, with the consequent dis- 
comfort. In order to obtain water, I should have had to get up 
and fetch the glass which stood on my wife’s bed-table. I thus 
quite appropriately dreamt that my wife was giving me a drink 
from a vase; this vase was an Etruscan cinerary urn, which I 
had brought home from Italy, and had since given away. But 
the water in it tasted so salt (apparently on account of the ashes) 
that I was forced to wake. It may be observed how conveniently 
the dream is capable of arranging matters. Since the fulfilment 
of a wish is its only purpose, it may be perfectly egoistic. Love of 
comfort is really not compatible with consideration for others. 
The introduction of the cinerary urn is probably once again the 
fulfilment of a wish; I regret that I no longer possess this vase; 
it, like the glass of water at my wife’s side, is inaccessible to me. 
The cinerary urn is appropriate also in connection with the 
sensation of an increasingly salty taste, which I know will com- 
pel me to wake . 1 

Such convenience-dreams came very frequently to me in my 
youth. Accustomed as I had always been to working until late 

1 The facts relating to dreams of thirst were known also to Weygandt, who 
speaks of them as follows: “It is just this sensation of thirst which is reg- 
istered most accurately of all; it always causes a representation of quench- 
ing the thirst. The manner in which the dream represents the act of 
quenching the thirst is manifold, and is specified in accordance with some 
recent recollection. A universal phenomenon noticeable here is the fact that 
the representation of quenching the thirst is immediately followed by dis- 
appointment in the inefficacy of the imagined refreshment” But he over- 
looks the universal character of the reaction of the dream to the stimulus. 
If other persons who are troubled by thirst at night awake without dream- 
ing beforehand, this does not constitute an objection to my experiment, but 
characterizes them as persons who sleep less soundly. Cf. here Isaiah xxix. 
8: “It shall even be as when an hungry man dreameth, and, behold, he 
eateth; but he awaketh, and his soul is empty: or as when a thirsty man 
dreameth, and, behold he drinketh; but he awaketh, and, behold he is 
faint ” 



$6 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

at night, early waiting was always a matter of difficulty. I used 
then to dream that I was out of bed and standing at the wash- 
stand. After a while I could no longer shut out the knowledge 
that I was not yet up; but in the meantime I had continued to 
sleep. The same sort of lethargy-dream was dreamed by a young 
colleague of mine, who appears to share my propensity for sleep. 
With him it assumed a particularly amusing form. The landlady 
with whom he was lodging in the neighbourhood of the hospital 
had strict orders to wake him every morning at a given hour, but 
she found it by no means easy to carry out his orders. One morn- 
ing sleep was especially sweet to him. The woman called into his 
room: “Herr Pepi, get up; you’ve got to go to the hospital.” 
Whereupon the sleeper dreamt of a room in the hospital, of a bed 
in which he was lying, and of a chart pinned over his head, which 
read as follows: “Pepi M., medical student, 22 years of age.” He 
told himself in the dream: “If I am already at the hospital, I 
don’t have to go there,” turned over, and slept on. He had thus 
frankly admitted to himself his motive for dreaming. 

Here is yet another dream of which the stimulus was active 
during sleep: One of my women patients, who had been obliged 
to undergo an unsuccessful operation on the jaw, was instructed 
by her physicians to wear by day and night a cooling apparatus 
on the affected cheek; but she was in the habit of throwing it off 
as soon as she had fallen asleep. One day I was asked to reprove 
her for doing so; she had again thrown the apparatus on the 
floor. The patient defended herself as follows: “This time I 
really couldn’t help it; it was the result of a dream which I had 
during the night. In the dream I was in a box at the opera, and 
was taking a lively interest in the performance. But Herr Karl 
Meyer was lying in the sanatorium and complaining pitifully on 
account of pains in his jaw. I said to myself, ‘Since I haven’t the 
pains, I don’t need the apparatus either’; that’s why I threw it 
away.” The dream of this poor sufferer reminds me of an expres- 
sion which comes to our lips when we are in a disagreeable situa- 
tion: “Well, I can imagine more amusing things!” The dream 
presents these “more amusing things!” Herr Karl Meyer, to 
whom the dreamer attributed her pains, was the most casual 
acquaintance of whom she could think. 



THE DREAM AS A WISH-FULFILMENT 37 

It is quite as simple a matter to discover the wish-fulfilment in 
several other dreams which I have collected from healthy per- 
sons. A friend who was acquainted with my theory of dreams, 
and had explained it to his wife, said to me one day: “My 
wife asked me to tell you that she dreamt yesterday that she 
was having her menses. You will know what that means.” Of 
course I know: if the young wife dreams that she is having her 
menses, the menses have stopped. I can well imagine that she 
would have liked to enjoy her freedom a little longer, before the 
discomforts of maternity began. It was a clever way of giving 
notice of her first pregnancy. Another friend writes that his wife 
had dreamt not long ago that she noticed milk-stains on the front 
of her blouse. This also is an indication of pregnancy, but not 
of the first one; the young mother hoped she would have more 
nourishment for the second child than she had for the first. 

A young woman who for weeks had been cut off from all so- 
ciety because she was nursing a child who was suffering from an 
infectious disease dreamt, after the child had recovered, of a 
company of people in which Alphonse Daudet, Paul Bourget, 
Marcel Prevost and others were present; they were all very 
pleasant to her and amused her enormously. In her dream these 
different authors had the features which their portraits give 
them. M. Prevost, with whose portrait she is not familiar, looked 
like the man who had disinfected the sickroom the day before, 
the first outsider to enter it for a long time. Obviously the dream 
is to be translated thus: “It is about time now for something 
more entertaining than this eternal nursing.” 

Perhaps this collection will suffice to prove that frequently, 
and under the most complex conditions, dreams may be noted 
which can be understood only as wish-fulfilments, and which 
present their content without concealment. In most cases these 
are short and simple dreams, and they stand in pleasant contrast 
to the confused and overloaded dream-compositions which have 
almost exclusively attracted the attention of the writers on the 
subject. But it will repay us if we give some time to the examina- 
tion of these simple dreams. The simplest dreams of all are, I 
suppose, to be expected in the case of children whose psychic 
activities are certainly less complicated than those of adults. 



38 THE INTERPRETATION OR DREAMS 

Child psychology, in my opinion, is destined to render the same 
services to the psychology of adults as a study of the structure 
or development of the lower animals renders to the investigation 
of the structure of the higher orders of animals. Hitherto but few 
deliberate efforts have been made to make use of the psychology 
of the child for such a purpose. 

The dreams of little children are often simple fulfilments of 
wishes, and for this reason are, as compared with the dreams of 
adults, by no means interesting. They present no problem to be 
solved, but they are invaluable as affording proof that the dream, 
in its inmost essence, is the fulfilment of a wish. I have been able 
to collect several examples of such dreams from the material 
furnished by my own children. 

For two dreams, one that of a daughter of mine, at that time 
eight and a half years of age, and the other that of a boy of five 
and a quarter, I am indebted to an excursion to Hallstatt, in the 
summer of 1896. 1 must first explain that we were living that sum- 
mer on a hill near Aussee, from which, when the weather was 
fine, we enjoyed a splendid view of the Dachstein. With a tele- 
scope we could easily distinguish the Simony hut. The children 
often tried to see it through the telescope — I do not know with 
what success. Before the excursion I had told the children that 
Hallstatt lay at the foot of the Dachstein. They looked forward 
to the outing with the greatest delight. From Hallstatt we en- 
tered the valley of Eschem, which enchanted the children with 
its constantly changing scenery. One of them, however, the boy 
of five, gradually became discontented. As often as a mountain 
came into view, he would ask: “Is that the Dachstein?” where- 
upon I had to reply: “No, only a foot-hill.” After this question 
had been repeated several times he fell quite silent, and did not 
wish to accompany us up the steps leading to the waterfall. I 
thought he was tired. But the next morning he came to me, 
perfectly happy, and said: “Last night I dreamt that we went 
to the Simony hut.” I understood him now; he had expected, 
when I spoke of the Dachstein, that on our excursion to Hall- 
statt he would climb the mountain, and would see at close 
quarters the hut which had been so often mentioned when the 
telescope was used. When he learned that he was expected to 


THE DREAM AS A WISH-EULEILMENT 39 

content himself with foot-hills and a waterfall he was disap- 
pointed, and became discontented. But the dream compensated 
him for all this. I tried to learn some details of the dream; they 
were scanty. “You go up steps for six hours,” as he had been told. 

On this excursion the girl of eight and a half had likewise 
cherished wishes which had to be satisfied by a dream. We had 
taken with us to Hallstatt our neighbour’s twelve-year-old boy; 
quite a polished little gentleman, who, it seemed to me, had 
already won the little woman’s sympathies. Next morning she 
related the following dream: “Just think, I dreamt that Emil 
was one of the family, that he said ‘papa’ and ‘mamma’ to you, 
and slept at our house, in the big room, like one of the boys. 
Then mamma came into the room and threw a handful of big 
bars of chocolate, wrapped in blue and green paper, under our 
beds.” The girl’s brothers, who evidently had not inherited an 
understanding of dream-interpretation, declared, just as the 
writers we have quoted would have done: “That dream is non- 
sense.” The girl defended at least one part of the dream, and 
from the standpoint of the theory of the neuroses it is interesting 
to learn which part it was that she defended: “That Emil was 
one of the family was nonsense, but that part about the bars 
of chocolate wasn’t.” It was just this latter part that was obscure 
to me, until my wife furnished the explanation. On the way home 
from the railway-station the children had stopped in front of a 
slot-machine, and had wanted exactly such bars of chocolate, 
wrapped in paper with a metallic lustre, such as the machine, 
in their experience, provided. But the mother thought, and 
rightly so, that the day had brought them enough wish-fulfil- 
ments, and therefore left this wish to be satisfied in the dream. 
This little scene had escaped me. That portion of the dream 
which had been condemned by my daughter I understood with- 
out any difficulty. I myself had heard the well-behaved little 
guest enjoining the children, as they were walking ahead of us, 
to wait until ‘papa’ or ‘mamma’ had come up. For the little girl 
the dream turned this temporary relationship into a permanent 
adoption. Her affection could not as yet conceive of any other 
way of enjoying her friend’s company permanently than the 
adoption pictured in her dream, which was suggested by her 



40 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

brothers. Why the bars of chocolate were thrown under the bed 
could not, of course, be explained without questioning the child. 

From a friend I have learned of a dream very much like that 
of my little boy. It was dreamed by a little girl of eight. Her 
father, accompanied by several children, had started on a walk 
to Dornbach, with the intention of visiting the Rohrcr hut, but 
had turned back, as it was growing late, promising the children 
to take them some other time. On the way bade they passed a 
signpost which pointed to the Hameau. The children now asked 
him to take them to the Hameau, but once more, and for the 
same reason, they had to be content with the promise that they 
should go there some other day. Next morning the little girl 
went to her father and told him, with a satisfied air: “Papa, I 
dreamed last night that you were with us at the Rohrer hut, and 
on the Hameau.” Thus, in the dream her impatience had an- 
ticipated the fulfilment of the promise made by her father. 

Another dream, with which the picturesque beauty of the 
Aussee inspired my daughter, at that time three and a quarter 
years of age, is equally straightforward. The little girl had 
crossed the lake for the first time, and the trip had passed too 
quickly for her. She did not want to leave the boat at the lauding, 
and cried bitterly. The next morning she told us: “Last night 
I was sailing on the lake.” Let us hope that the duration of this 
dream-voyage was more satisfactory to her. 

My eldest boy, at that time eight years of age, was already 
dreaming of the realization of his fancies. He had ridden in a 
chariot with Achilles, with Diomedes as charioteer. On the pre- 
vious day he had shown a lively interest in a book on the myths 
of Greece which had been given to his elder sister. 

If it can be admitted that the talking of children in their sleep 
belongs to the sphere of dreams, I can relate the following as 
one of the earliest dreams in my collection: My youngest daugh- 
ter, at that time nineteen months old, vomited one morning, and 
was therefore kept without food all day. During the night she 
was heard to call excitedly in her sleep: “Anna F(r)eud, 
sfawbewy, wild st’awbewy, om’lette, pap l” She used her name 
in this way in order to express the act of appropriation; the 
menu presumably included everything that would seem to her a 


THE DREAM AS A WISH-FULFILMENT 


41 


desirable meal; the fact that two varieties of strawberry ap- 
peared in it was a demonstration against the sanitary regulations 
of the household, and was based on the circumstance, which she 
had by no means overlooked, that the nurse had ascribed her 
indisposition to an over-plentiful consumption of strawberries; 
so in her dream she avenged herself for this opinion which met 
with her disapproval. 2 3 4 * * * 

When we call childhood happy because it does not yet know 
sexual desire, we must not forget what a fruitful source of disap- 
pointment and renunciation, and therefore of dream-stimula- 
tion, the other great vital impulse may be for the child. 8 Here is 
a second example. My nephew, twenty-two months of age, had 
been instructed to congratulate me on my birthday, and to give 
me a present of a small basket of cherries, which at that time of 
the year were scarce, being hardly in season. He seemed to find 
the task a difficult one, for he repeated again and again: “Cher- 
ries in it,” and could not be induced to let the little basket go out 
of his hands. But he knew how to indemnify himself. He had, 
until then, been in the habit of telling his mother every morning 
that he had dreamt of the “white soldier,” an officer of the guard 
in a white cloak, whom he had once admired in the street. On 
the day after the sacrifice on my birthday he woke up joyfully 
with the announcement, which could have referred only to a 
dream: “He[r\ man eaten all the cherries 1”* 

2 The dream afterwards accomplished the same purpose in the case of the 
child’s grandmother, who is older than the child by about seventy years. 
After she had been forced to go hungry for a day on account of the restless- 
ness of her floating kidney, she dreamed, being apparently translated into 
the happy years of her girlhood, that she had been “asked out,” invited to 
lunch and dinner, and had at each meal been served with the most delicious 
titbits. 

3 A more searching investigation into the psychic life of the child teaches 
us, of course, that sexual motives, in infantile forms, play a very consider- 
able part, which has been too long overlooked, in the psychic activity of the 
child. This permits us to doubt to some extent the happiness of the child, 
as imagined later by adults. Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory of Sex . 

4 It should be mentioned that young children often have more complex and 

obscure dreams, while, on the other hand, adults, in certain circumstances* 

often have dreams of a simple and infantile character. How rich in unsus- 

pected content the dreams of children no more than four or five years oi 



42 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


What animals dream of I do not know. A proverb for which 
I am indebted to one of my pupils professes to tell us, for it asks 
the question: “What does the goose dream of?” and answers: 

ape may be shown by the examples in my Analyse der Phobic cities jim - 
fjahrigen Knaben ( Jahrbuch von Flculcr-Frcud, vol, i, 1909), anti Jung’s 
“Experiences Concerning the Psychic Life of the Child,” translated by Brill, 
American Journal of Psychology, April. 1910, For analytically interpreted 
dreams of children, see also von Hug-Hdlmuth, Putnam, Raalte, Spiclrcin, 
and Tausk; others by Banchieri, Busemann, Doglia, and especially Wigaiu, 
who emphasizes the wish-fulfilling tendency of such dreams, On the other 
hand, it seems that dreams of an infantile type reappear with especial fre- 
quency in adults who are transferred into the midst of unfamiliar condi- 
tions. Thus Otto Nordcnskjold, in his book, Antarctic (1904, vol. i, p. 336), 
writes as follows of the crew who spent the winter with him; “Very char- 
acteristic of the trend of our inmost thoughts were our dreams, which were 
never more vivid and more numerous. Even those of our comrades with 
whom dreaming was formerly exceptional had long stories to tell in the 
morning, when we exchanged our experiences in the world of phantasy. 
They all had reference to that outside world which was now so far removed 
from us, but they often fitted into our immediate circumstances. An espe- 
cially characteristic dream was that in which one of our comrades believed 
himself back at school, where the task was assigned to him of skinning 
miniature seals, which were manufactured especially for purposes of in- 
struction. Eating and drinking constituted the pivot around which most of 
our dreams revolved. One of us, who was especially fond of going to big 
dinner-parties, was delighted if he could report in the morning ‘that he had 
had a three-course dinner.’ Another dreamed of tobacco, whole mountains 
of tobacco ; yet another dreamed of a ship approaching on the open sea 
under full sail. Still another dream deserves to be mentioned; The postman 
brought the post and gave a long explanation of why it was so long de- 
layed ; he had delivered it at the wrong address, and only with great trouble 
was he able to get it back. To be sure, we were often occupied in our sleep 
with still more impossible things, but the lack of phantasy in almost all the 
dreams which I myself dreamed, or heard others relate, was quite strik- 
ing. It would certainly have been of great psychological interest if all 
these dreams could have been recorded. But one can readily understand 
how we longed for sleep. That alone could afford us everything that we all 
most ardently desired.” I will continue by a quotation from Du Prel (p. 
231) : “Mungo Park, nearly dying of thirst on one of his African expedi- 
tions, dreamed constantly of the well-watered valleys and meadows of his 
home. Similarly Trenck, tortured by hunger in the fortress of Magdeburg, 
saw himself surrounded by copious meals. And George Back, a member of 
Franklin’s first expedition, when he was on the point of death by starva- 
tion, dreamed continually and invariably of plenteous meals.” 



THE DKEAM AS A WISH-FULFILMENT 43 

“Of maize .” 5 The whole theory that the dream is the fulfilment of 
a wish is contained in these two sentences . 6 

We now perceive that we should have reached our theory of 
the hidden meaning of dreams by the shortest route had we 
merely consulted the vernacular. Proverbial wisdom, it is true, 
often speaks contemptuously enough of dreams — it apparently 
seeks to justify the scientists when it says that “dreams are bub- 
bles”; but in colloquial language the dream is predominantly 
the gracious fulfiller of wishes. “I should never have imagined 
that in my wildest dreams,” we exclaim in delight if we find that 
the reality surpasses our expectations. 

5 A Hungarian proverb cited by Ferenczi states more explicitly that “the 
pig dreams of acorns, the goose of maize.” A Jewish proverb asks: “Of 
what does the hen dream?” — “Of millet” ( Sammlung jud . Sprichw. «. 
Redensarten, edit, by Bernstein, 2nd ed., p. 116). 

6 1 am far from wishing to assert that no previous writer has ever thought 
of tracing a dream to a wish. (Cf. the first passages of the next chapter.) 
Those interested in the subject will find that even in antiquity the physician 
Herophilos, who lived under the First Ptolemy, distinguished between three 
kinds of dreams: dreams sent by the gods; natural dreams — those which 
come about whenever the soul creates for itself an image of that which is 
beneficial to it, and will come to pass; and mixed dreams — those which 
originate spontaneously from the juxtaposition of images, when we see that 
which we desire. From the examples collected by Schemer, J. Starcke cites 
a dream which was described by the author himself as a wish-fulfilment 
(p. 239). Schemer says: “The phantasy immediately fulfills the dreamer’s 
wish, simply because this existed vividly in the mind.” This dream belongs 
to the “emotional dreams.” Akin to it are dreams due to “masculine and 
feminine erotic longing,” and to “irritable moods ” As will readily be seen, 
Schemer does not ascribe to the wish any further significance for the dream 
than to any other psychic condition of the waking state ; least of all does 
he insist on the connection between the wish and the essential nature of the 
dream. 


IV 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


Jr i now declare that wish-fulfilment is the meaning of every 
dream, so that there cannot be any dreams other than wish- 
dreams, I know beforehand that I shall meet with the most 
emphatic contradiction. My critics will object: “The fact that 
there are dreams which are to be understood as fulfilments of 
wishes is not new, but has long since been recognized by such 
writers as Radestock, Volkelt, Purkinje, Griesinger and others. 1 
That there can be no other dreams than those of wish-fulfilments 
isyetone more unjustified generalization; which, fortunately, can 
be easily refuted. Dreams which present the most painful con- 
tent, and not the least trace of wish-fulfilment, occur frequently 
enough. The pessimistic philosopher, Eduard von Hartmann, is 
perhaps most completely opposed to the theory of wish-fulfil- 
ment. In his Philosophy of the Unconscious , Part II (Stereo- 
typed German edition, s. 344), he says: ‘As regards the dream, 
with it all the troubles of waking life pass over into the sleeping 
state; all save the one thing which may in some degree reconcile 
the cultured person with life — scientific and artistic enjoyment. 
. . .’ But even less pessimistic observers have emphasized the 
fact that in our dreams pain and disgust are more frequent than 
pleasure (Scholz, p. 33 ; Volkelt, p. 80, ef at .) . Two ladies, Sarah 
Weed and Florence Hallam, have even worked out, on the basis 
of their dreams, a numerical value for the preponderance of 

1 Already Plotinus, the neo-Platonist, said: ‘‘When desire bestirs itself, then 
comes phantasy, and presents to us, as it were, the object of desire” ''Du 
Prel, p. 276). 


44 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


4S 

distress and discomfort in dreams. They find that 58 per cent, of 
dreams are disagreeable, and only 28.6 per cent, positively 
pleasant. Besides those dreams that convey into our sleep the 
many painful emotions of life, there are also anxiety- dreams, in 
which this most terrible of all the painful emotions torments us 
until we wake. Now it is precisely by these anxiety-dreams that 
children are so often haunted (cf. Debacker on Pavor nocturnus ) ; 
and yet it was in children that you found the wish-fulfilment 
dream in its most obvious form.” 

The anxiety-dream does really seem to preclude a generaliza- 
tion of the thesis deduced from the examples given in the last 
chapter, that dreams are wish-fulfilments, and even to condemn 
it as an absurdity. 

Nevertheless, it is not difficult to parry these apparently in- 
vincible objections. It is merely necessary to observe that our 
doctrine is not based upon the estimates of the obvious dream- 
content, but relates to the thought-content, which, in the course 
of interpretation, is found to lie behind the dream. Let us com- 
pare and contrast the manifest and the latent dream-content . It 
is true that there are dreams the manifest content of which is of 
the most painful nature. But has anyone ever tried to interpret 
these dreams — to discover their latent thought-content? If not, 
the two objections to our doctrine are no longer valid; for there 
is always the possibility that even our painful and terrifying 
dreams may, upon interpretation, prove to be wish- fulfilments, 2 * * * * * * 

2 It is quite incredible with what obstinancy readers and critics have ex- 

cluded this consideration and disregarded the fundamental differentiation 

between the manifest and the latent dream-content. Nothing in the litera- 

ture of the subject approaches so closely to my own conception of dreams 
as a passage in J. Sully’s essay: Dreams as a Revelation (and it is not be- 

cause I do not think it valuable that 1 allude to it here for the first time) . 
“It would seem then, after all, that dreams are not the utter nonsense they 
have been said to be by such authorities as Chaucer, Shakespeare, and 
Milton. The chaotic aggregations of our night-fancy have a significance and 

communicate new knowledge. Like some letter in cipher, the dream-inscrip- 

tion when scrutinized closely loses its first look of balderdash and takes 
on the aspect of a serious, intelligible message. Or, to vary the figure 
slightly, we may say that, like some pamphlets the dream discloses beneath 

its worthless surface-characters traces of an old and precious communica- 
tion 9 * (p. 364). 


46 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

In scientific research it is often advantageous, if the solution 
of one problem presents difficulties, to add to it a second prob- 
lem; just as it is easier to crack two nuts together instead of 
separately. Thus, we are confronted not only with the problem: 
How can painful and terrifying dreams be the fulfilments of 
wishes? but we may add to this a second problem which arises 
from the foregoing discussion of the general problem of the 
dream: Why do not the dreams that show an indifferent conteut, 
and yet turn out to be wish-fulfilments, reveal their meaning 
without disguise? Take the exhaustively treated dream of Irma’s 
injection: it is by no means of a painful character, and it may 
be recognized, upon interpretation, as a striking wish-fulfilment. 
But why is an interpretation necessary at all? Why does not the 
dream say directly what it means? As a matter of fact, the dream 
of Irma’s injection does not at first produce the impression that 
it represents a wish of the dreamer’s as fulfilled. The reader will 
not have received this impression, and even I myself was not 
aware of the fact until I had undertaken the analysis. If we call 
this peculiarity of dreams — namely, that they need elucidation 
— the phenomenon of distortion in dreams, a second question 
then arises: What is the origin of this distortion in dreams? 

If one’s first thoughts on this subject were consulted several 
possible solutions might suggest themselves: for example, that 
during sleep one is incapable of finding an adequate expression 
for one’s dream-thoughts. The analysis of certain dreams, how- 
ever, compels us to offer another explanation. I shall demonstrate 
this by means of a second dream of my own, which again involves 
numerous indiscretions, but which compensates for this personal 
sacrifice by affording a thorough elucidation of the problem. 

Preliminary Statement . — In the spring of 1897 I learnt that 
two professors of our university had proposed me for the title of 
Professor Extraordinarius (assistant professor) . The news came 
as a surprise to me, and pleased me considerably as an expression 
of appreciation on the part of two eminent men which could not 
be explained by personal interest. But I told myself immediately 
that I must not expect anything to come of their proposal. For 
some years past the Ministry had disregarded such proposals, 
and several colleagues of mine, who were my seniors, and at 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


47 

*east my equals in desert, had been waiting in vain all this time 
for the appointment. I had no reason to suppose that I should 
fare any better. I resolved, therefore, to resign myself to disap- 
pointment. I am not, so far as I know, ambitious, and I was fol- 
lowing my profession with gratifying success even without the 
recommendation of a professorial title. Whether I considered 
the grapes to be sweet or sour did not matter, since they undoubt- 
edly hung too high for me. 

One evening a friend of mine called to see me; one of those 
colleagues whose fate I had regarded as a warning. As he had 
long been a candidate for promotion to the professorate (which 
in our society makes the doctor a demigod to his patients), and 
as he was less resigned than I, he was accustomed from time to 
time to remind the authorities of his claims in the hope of ad- 
vancing his interests. It was after one of these visits that he 
called on me. He said that this time he had driven the exalted 
gentleman into a corner, and had asked him frankly whether 
considerations of religious denomination were not really respon- 
sible for the postponement of his appointment. The answer was: 
His Excellency had to admit that in the present state of public 
opinion he was not in a position, etc. “Now at least I know 
where I stand/ 7 my friend concluded his narrative, which told 
me nothing new, but which was calculated to confirm me in my 
resignation. For the same denominational considerations would 
apply to my own case. 

On the morning after my friend’s visit I had the following 
dream, which was notable also on account of its form. It con- 
sisted of two thoughts and two images, so that a thought and an 
image emerged alternately. But here I shall record only the 
first half of the dream, since the second half has no relation to the 
purpose for which I cite the dream. 

I. My friend R. is my uncle — I have a great affection for him . 
II. I see before me his face , somewhat altered . It seems to be 
elongated; a yellow beard , which surrounds it, is seen with 
peculiar distinctness . 

Then follow the other two portions of the dream, again a 
thought and an image, which I omit. 



48 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

The interpretation of this dream was arrived at in the follow- 
ing manner: 

When I recollected the dream in the course of the morning, I 
laughed outright and said, “The dream is nonsense.” But I could 
not get it out of my mind, and I was pursued by it all day, 
until at least, in the evening, I reproached myself in these words: 
“If in the course of a dream-interpretation one of your patients 
could find nothing better to say than ‘That is nonsense,’ you 
would reprove him, and you would suspect that behind the 
dream there was hidden some disagreeable affair, the exposure of 
which he wanted to spare himself. Apply the same thing to your 
own case; your opinion that the dream is nonsense probably sig- 
nifies merely an inner resistance to its interpretation. Don’t let 
yourself be put off.” I then proceeded with the interpretation. 

“R. is my uncle.” What can that mean? I had only one uncle, 
my uncle Joseph. 3 His story, to be sure, was a sad one. Once, 
more than thirty years ago, hoping to make money, he allowed 
himself to be involved in transactions of a kind which the law 
punishes severely, and paid the penalty. My father, whose hair 
turned grey with grief within a few days, used always to say that 
unde Joseph had never been a bad man, but, after all, he was 
a simpleton. If, then, my friend R. is my uncle Joseph, that is 
equivalent to saying: R. is a simpleton.” Hardly credible, and 
very disagreeable I But there is the face that I saw in the dream, 
with its elongated features and its yellow beard. My uncle actu- 
ally had such a face — long, and framed in a handsome yellow 
beard. My friend R. was extremely swarthy, but when black- 
haired people begin to grow grey they pay for the glory of their 
youth. Their black beards undergo an unpleasant change of col- 
our, hair by hair; first they turn a reddish brown, then a yellow- 
ish brown, and then definitely grey. My friend R.’s beard is now 
in this stage; so, for that matter, is my own, a fact which I note 
with regret. The face that I see in my dream is at once that of 

3 It is astonishing to sfie how my memory here restricts itself — in the 
waking state! — for the purposes of analysis. I have known five of my 
uncles and I loved and honoured one of them. But at the moment when 
I overcame my resistance to the interpretation of the dream, I said to my- 
self: “I have only one unde, the one who is intended in the dream.” 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 49 

my friend R. and that of my uncle. It is like one of those com- 
posite photographs of Gal ton’s; in order to emphasize family 
resemblances Galton had several faces photographed on the same 
plate. No doubt is now possible; it is really my opinion that my 
friend R. is a simpleton — like my uncle Joseph. 

I have still no idea for what purpose I have worked out this 
relationship. It is certainly one to which I must unreservedly 
object. Yet it is not very profound, for my uncle was a criminal, 
and my friend R. is not, except in so far as he was once fined for 
knocking down an apprentice with his bicycle. Can I be thinking 
of this offence? That would make the comparison ridiculous. 
Here I recollect another conversation, which I had some days 
ago with another colleague, N.; as a matter of fact, on the same 
subject. I met N. in the street; he, too, has been nominated for 
a professorship, and having heard that I had been similarly hon- 
oured he congratulated me. I refused his congratulations, saying: 
“You are the last man to jest about the matter, for you know 
from your own experience what the nomination is worth.” There- 
upon he said, though probably not in earnest: “You can’t be 
sure of that. There is a special objection in my case. Don’t you 
know that a woman once brought a criminal accusation against 
me? I need hardly assure you that the matter was put right. It 
was a mean attempt at blackmail, and it was all I could do to save 
the plaintiff from punishment. But it may be that the affair is 
remembered against me at the Ministry. You, on the other hand, 
are above reproach.” Here, then, I have the criminal, and at the 
same time the interpretation and tendency of my dream. My 
uncle Joseph represents both of my colleagues who have not been 
appointed to the professorship — the one as a simpleton, the other 
as a criminal. Now, too, I know for what purpose I need this rep- 
resentation. If denominational considerations are a determining 
factor in the postponement of my two friends’ appointment, then 
my own appointment is likewise in jeopardy. But if I can refer 
the rejection of my two friends to other causes, which do not 
apply to my own case, my hopes are unaffected. This is the pro- 
cedure followed by my dream: it makes the one friend, R., a 
simpleton, and the other, N., a criminal. But since I am neither 
one nor the other, there is nothing in common between us. I have 



SO THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

a right to enjoy my appointment to the title of professor, and 
have avoided the distressing application to my own case of the 
information which the official gave to my friend R. 

I must pursue the interpretation of this dream still farther; 
for I have a feeling that it is not yet satisfactorily elucidated. X 
still feel disquieted by the ease with which I have degraded two 
respected colleagues in order to clear my own way to the profes- 
sorship. My dissatisfaction with this procedure has, of course, 
been mitigated since I have learned to estimate the testimony 
of dreams at its true value. I should contradict anyone who sug- 
gested that I really considered R. a simpleton, or that I did not 
believe N.’s account of the blackmailing incident. And of course 
I do not believe that Irma has been made seriously ill by an injec- 
tion of a preparation of propyl administered by Otto. Here, as 
before, what the dream expresses is only my wish that things 
might be so. The statement in which my wish is realized sounds 
less absurd in the second dream than in the first; it is here made 
with a skilful use of actual points of support in establishing some- 
thing like a plausible slander, one of which one could say that 
“there is something in it.” For at that time my friend R. had to 
contend with the adverse vote of a university professor of his 
own department, and my friend N. had himself, all suspcctingly, 
provided me with material for the calumny. Nevertheless, I re- 
peat, it still seems to me that the dream requires further eluci- 
dation. 

I remember now that the dream contained yet another portion 
which has hitherto been ignored by the interpretation. After it 
occurred to me that my friend R. was my uncle, I felt in the 
dream a great affection for him. To whom is this feeling directed? 
For my uncle Joseph, of course, I have never had any feelings 
of affection. R. has for many years been a dearly loved friend, 
but if X were to go to him and express my affection for him in 
terms approaching the degree of affection which I felt in the 
dream, he would undoubtedly be surprised. My affection, if it 
was for him, seems false and exaggerated, as does my judgment 
of his intellectual qualities, which I expressed by merging his 
personality in that of my uncle; but exaggerated in the opposite 
direction. Now, however, a new state of affairs dawns upon me. 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


51 


The affection in the dream does not belong to the latent content, 
to the thoughts behind the dream; it stands in opposition to this 
content; it is calculated to conceal the knowledge conveyed by 
the interpretation. Probably this is precisely its function. I re- 
member with what reluctance I undertook the interpretation, 
how long I tried to postpone it, and how I declared the dream to 
be sheer nonsense. I know from my psychoanalytic practice how 
such a condemnation is to be interpreted. It has no informative 
value, but merely expresses an affect. If my little daughter does 
not like an apple which is offered her, she asserts that the apple 
is bitter, without even tasting it. If my patients behave thus, I 
know that we are dealing with an idea which they are trying to 
repress. The same thing applies to my dream. I do not want 
to interpret it because there is something in the interpretation to 
which I object. After the interpretation of the dream is com- 
pleted, I discover what it was to which I objected; it was the 
assertion that R. is a simpleton. I can refer the affection which 
I feel for R. not to the latent dream-thoughts, but rather to this 
unwillingness of mine. If my dream, as compared with its latent 
content, is disguised at this point, and actually misrepresents 
things by producing their opposites, then the manifest affection 
in the dream serves the purpose of the misrepresentation; in 
other words, the distortion is here shown to be intentional — it is 
a means of disguise. My dream-thoughts of R. are derogatory, 
and so that I may not become aware of this the very opposite of 
defamation — a tender affection for him — enters into the dream. 

This discovery may prove to be generally valid. As the exam- 
ples in Chapter III have demonstrated, there are, of course, 
dreams which are undisguised wish-fulfilments. Wherever a 
wish-fulfilment is unrecognizable and disguised there must be 
present a tendency to defend oneself against this wish, and in 
consequence of this defence the wish is unable to express itself 
save in a distorted form. I will try to find a parallel in social life 
to this occurrence in the inner psychic life. Where in social life 
can a similar misrepresentation be found? Only where two per- 
sons are concerned, one of whom possesses a certain power while 
the other has to act with a certain consideration on account of 


this power. The second person will then distort his psychic ac- 

' 7 sy 






52 THE IN TEEPRETATION OF DREAMS 

tions; or, as we say, he will mask himself. The politeness which I 
practise every day is largely a disguise of this kind; if I interpret 
my dreams for the benefit of my readers, I am forced to make 
misrepresentations of this kind. The poet even complains of the 
necessity of such misrepresentation: Das Bcstc , was du wisscn 
kannst, darfst du den Bubcn dock nicht sagcn; “The best that 
thou canst know thou mayst not tell to boys.” 

The political writer who has unpleasant truths to tell to those 
in power finds himself in a like position. If he tells everything 
without reserve, the Government will suppress them — retrospec- 
tively in the case of a verbal expression of opinion, preventively 
if they are to be published in the Press. The writer stands in fear 
of the censorship; he therefore moderates and disguises the ex- 
pression of his opinions. He finds himself compelled, in accord- 
ance with the sensibilities of the censor, either to refrain alto- 
gether from certain forms of attack, or to express himself in 
allusions instead of by direct assertions; or he must conceal his 
objectionable statement in an apparently innocent disguise. He 
may, for instance, tell of a contretemps between two Chinese 
mandarins, while he really has in mind the officials of his own 
country. The stricter the domination of the censorship, the more 
thorough becomes the disguise, and, often enough, the more in- 
genious the means employed to put the reader on the track of 
the actual meaning. 

The detailed correspondence between the phenomena of cen- 
sorship and the phenomena of dream-distortion justifies us in 
presupposing similar conditions for both. We should then assume 
that in every human being there exist, as the primary cause of 
dream formation, two psychic forces (tendencies or systems), 
one of which forms the wish expressed by the dream, while the 
other exercises a censorship over this dream-wish, thereby en- 
forcing on it a distortion. The question is, what is the nature 
of the authority of this second agency by virtue of which it is 
able to exercise its censorship? If we remember that the latent 
dream-thoughts are not conscious before analysis, but that the 
manifest dream-content emerging from them is consciously re- 
membered, it is not a far-fetched assumption that admittance to 
the consciousness is the prerogative of the second agency. Noth- 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


53 

ing can reach the consciousness from the first system which has 
not previously passed the second instance; and the second in- 
stance lets nothing pass without exercising its rights, and forcing 
such modifications as are pleasing to itself upon the candidates 
for admission to consciousness. Here we arrive at a very definite 
conception of the “essence” of consciousness; for us the state 
of becoming conscious is a special psychic act, different from and 
independent of the process of becoming fixed or represented, and 
consciousness appears to us as a sensory organ which perceives 
a content proceeding from another source. It may be shown 
that psychopathology simply cannot dispense with these fun- 
damental assumptions. But we shall reserve for another time 
a more exhaustive examination of the subject. 

If I bear in mind the notion of the two psychic instances and 
their relation to the consciousness, I find in the sphere of politics 
a perfectly appropriate analogy to the extraordinary affection 
which I feel for my friend R., who is so disparaged in the dream- 
interpretation. I refer to the political life of a State in which the 
ruler, jealous of his rights, and an active public opinion are in 
mutual conflict. The people, protesting against the actions of an 
unpopular official, demand his dismissal. The autocrat, on the 
other hand, in order to show his contempt for the popular will, 
may then deliberately confer upon the official some exceptional 
distinction which otherwise would not have been conferred. 
Similarly, my second instance, controlling the access to my con- 
sciousness, distinguishes my friend R. with a rush of extraordi- 
nary affection, because the wish-tendencies of the first system, 
in view of a particular interest on which they are just then in- 
tent, would like to disparage him as a simpleton . 4 

4 Such hypocritical dreams are not rare, either with me or with others. 
While I have been working at a certain scientific problem I have been 
visited for several nights, at quite short intervals, by a somewhat confusing 
dream which has as its content a reconciliation with a friend dropped long 
ago. After three or four attempts I finally succeeded in grasping the meaning 
of this dream. It was in the nature of an encouragement to give up the 
remnant of consideration still surviving for the person in question, to make 
myself quite free from him, but it hypocritically disguised itself in its anti- 
thesis. I have recorded a “hypocritical Oedipus dream” in which the hostile 
feelings and death- wishes of the dream-thoughts were replaced by manifest 
tenderness (“Typisches Beispiel eines verkappten Oedipustraumes,” Zen- 



54 the interpretation of dreams 

We may now perhaps begin to suspect that dream-interpreta- 
tion is capable of yielding information concerning the structure 
of our psychic apparatus which we have hitherto vainly expected 
from philosophy. We shall not, however, follow up this trail, 
but shall return to our original problem as soon as we have eluci- 
dated the problem of dream-distortion. The question arose, how 
dreams with a disagreeable content can be analysed as wish-ful- 
filments. We see now that this is possible where a dream-distor- 
tion has occurred, when the disagreeable content serves only to 
disguise the thing wished for. With regard to our assumptions 
respecting the two psychic instances, we can now also say that 
disagreeable dreams contain, as a matter of fact, something 
which is disagreeable to the second instance, but which at the 
same time fulfils a wish of the first instance. They are wish- 
dreams in so far as every dream emanates from the first instance, 
while the second instance behaves towards the dream only in a 
defensive, not in a constructive manner . 5 Were we to limit our- 
selves to a consideration of what the second instance contributes 
to the dream we should never understand the dream, and all the 
problems which the writers on the subject have discovered in the 
dream would have to remain unsolved. 

That the dream actually has a secret meaning, which proves 
to be a wish-fulfilment, must be proved afresh in every case by 
analysis. I will therefore select a few dreams which have painful 
contents, and endeavour to analyse them. Some of them are 
dreams of hysterical subjects, which therefore call for a long 
preliminary statement, and in some passages an examination of . 
the psychic processes occurring in hysteria. This, though it will 
complicate the presentation, is unavoidable. 

When I treat a psychoneurotic patient analytically, his dreams 
regularly, as I have said, become a theme of our conversations. 

I must therefore give him all the psychological explanations with 
whose aid I myself have succeeded in understanding his symp- 


tralblati fur Psychoanalyse, Bd. i. Heft x-n, 1910). Another class of 
hypocritical dreams will be recorded in another place (see Chap, vi, The 
Dream-Work) . 

5 Later on we shall become acquainted with cases in which, on the con- 
trary, the dream expresses a wish of this second instance. 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


SS 

toms. And here I encounter unsparing criticism, which is perhaps 
no less shrewd than that which I have to expect from my col- 
leagues. With perfect uniformity my patients contradict the doc- 
trine that dreams are the fulfilments of wishes. Here are several 
examples of the sort of dream-material which is adduced in refu- 
tation of my theory. 

“You are always saying that a dream is a wish fulfilled,” be- 
gins an intelligent lady patient. “Now I shall tell you a dream in 
which the content is quite the opposite, in which a wish of mine 
is not fulfilled. How do you reconcile that with your theory? The 
dream was as follows: l want to give a supper , but I have nothing 
available except some smoked salmon . I think I will go shopping , 
but 1 remember that it is Sunday afternoon when all the shops 
are closed . I then try to ring up a few caterers , but the telephone 
is out of order. Accordingly I have to renounce my desire to give 
a supper” 

I reply, of course, that only the analysis can decide the mean- 
ing of this dream, although I admit that at first sight it seems 
sensible and coherent and looks like the opposite of a wish-ful- 
filment, “But what occurrence gave rise to this dream?” I ask. 
“You know that the stimulus of a dream always lies among the 
experiences of the preceding day.” 

Analysis. — The patient’s husband, an honest and capable meat 
salesman, had told her the day before that he was growing too 
fat, and that he meant to undergo treatment for obesity. He 
would rise early, take physical exercise, keep to a strict diet, and 
above all accept no more invitations to supper. — She proceeds 
jestingly to relate how her husband, at a table d'hote , had made 
the acquaintance of an artist, who insisted upon painting his 
portrait, because he, the painter, had never seen such an expres- 
sive head. But her husband had answered in his downright fash- 
ion, that while he was much obliged, he would rather not be 
painted; and he was quite convinced that a bit of a pretty 
young girl’s posterior would please the artist better than his 
whole face. 6 — She is very much in love with her husband, and 

6 To sit for the painter. 

Goethe: “And if he has no backside, 

How can the nobleman sit?” 



56 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

teases him a good deal. She has asked him not to give her any 
caviar. What can that mean? 

As a matter of fact, she had wanted for a long time to eat a 
caviar sandwich every morning, but had grudged the expense. 
Of course she could get the caviar from her husband at once if 
she asked for it. But she has, on the contrary, begged him not to 
give her any caviar, so that she might tease him about it a little 
longer. 

(To me this explanation seems thin. Unconfessed motives are 
wont to conceal themselves behind just such unsatisfying ex- 
planations. We are reminded of the subjects hypnotized by Bern- 
heim, who carried out a post-hypnotic order, and who, on being 
questioned as to their motives, instead of answering: “I do not 
know why I did that,” had to invent a reason that was obviously 
inadequate. There is probably something similar to this in the 
case of my patient’s caviar. I see that in waking life she is com- 
pelled to invent an unfulfilled wish. Her dream also shows her 
the non-fulfilment of her wish. But why does she need an un- 
fulfilled wish?) 

The ideas elicited so far are insufficient for the interpreta- 
tion of the dream. I press for more. After a short pause, which 
corresponds to the overcoming of a resistance, she reports that 
the day before she had paid a visit to a friend of whom she is 
really jealous because her husband is always praising this lady 
so highly. Fortunately this friend is very thin and lanky, and 
her husband likes full figures. Now of what did this thin friend 
speak? Of course, of her wish to become rather plumper. She 
also asked my patient: “When are you going to invite us again? 
You always have such good food.” 

Now the meaning of the dream is clear. I am able to tdl the 
patient: “It is just as though you had thought at the moment 
of her asking you that: ‘Of course, I’m to invite you so that you 
can eat at my house and get fat and become still more pleasing 
to my husband 1 I would rather give no more suppers 1’ The 
dream then tells you that you cannot give a supper, thereby ful- 
filling your wish not to contribute anythng to the rounding out of 
your friend’s figure. Your husband’s resolution to accept no 
more invitations to supper in order that he may grow thin 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


57 

teaches you that one grows fat on food eaten at other people’s 
tables.” Nothing is lacking now but some sort of coincidence 
which will confirm the solution. The smoked salmon in the dream 
has not yet been traced. — “How did you come to thinV 0 f salmon 
in your dream?” — “Smoked salmon is my friend’s favorite rli^h » 
she replied. It happens that I know the lady, and am able to 
affirm that she grudges herself salmon just as my patient grudges 
herself caviar. 

This dream admits of yet another and more exact interpreta- 
tion — one which is actually necessitated only by a sub sidiar y 
circumstance. The two interpretations do not contradict one 
another, but rather dovetail into one another, and fur nish an 
excellent example of the usual ambiguity of dre ams , as of all 
other psychopathological formations. We have heard tha t a t 
the time of her dream of a denied wish the patient was impelled to 
deny herself a real wish (the wish to eat caviar sandwiches). Her 
friend, too, had expressed a wish, namely, to get fatter, and it 
would not surprise us if our patient had dreamt that this wish of 
her friend’s — the wish to increase in weight— was not to be ful- 
filled. Instead of this, however, she dreamt that one of her own 
wishes was not fulfilled. The dream becomes capable of a new 
interpretation if in the dream she does not mean herself, but 
her friend, if she has put herself in the place of her friend, or, 
as we may say, has identified herself with her friend. 

I think she has actually done this, and as a sign of this identi- 
fication she has created for herself in real life an unfulfilled wish. 
But what is the meaning of this hysterical identification? To 
elucidate this a more exhaustive exposition is necessary. Identi- 
fication is a highly important motive in the mechanism of hys- 
terical symptoms; by this means patients are enabled to express 
in their symptoms not merely their own experiences, but the ex- 
periences of quite a number of other persons; they can suffer, 
as it were, for a whole mass of people, and fill all the parts of a 
drama with their own personalities. It will here be objected that 
this is the well-known hysterical imitation, the ability of hys- 
terical subjects to imitate all the symptoms which impress them 
when they occur in others, as though pity were aroused to the 
point of reproduction. This, however, only indicates the path 



58 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

which the psychic process follows in hysterical imitation. But 
the path itself and the psychic act which follows this path are 
two different matters. The act itself is slightly more compli- 
cated than we are prone to believe the imitation of the hysterical 
to be; it corresponds to an unconscious end-process, as an ex- 
ample will show. The physician who has, in the same ward with 
other patients, a female patient suffering from a particular kind 
of twitching, is not surprised if one morning he learns that this 
peculiar hysterical affection has found imitators. He merely tells 
himself: The others have seen her, and have imitated her; this 
is psychic infection. — Yes, but psychic infection occurs some- 
what in the following manner: As a rule, patients know more 
about one another than the physician knows about any one of 
them, and they are concerned about one another when the doc- 
tor’s visit is over. One of them has an attack to-day: at once it 
is known to the rest that a letter from home, a recrudescence of 
lovesickness, or the like, is the cause. Their sympathy is aroused, 
and although it does not emerge into consciousness they form the 
following conclusion: “If it is possible to suffer such an attack 
from such a cause, I too may suffer this sort of an attack, for I 
have the same occasion for it.” If this were a conclusion capable 
of becoming conscious, it would perhaps express itself in dread. 
of suffering a like attack; but it is formed in another psychic 
region, and consequently ends in the realization of the dreaded 
symptoms. Thus identification is not mere imitation, but an as- 
similation based upon the same etiological claim, it expresses a 
“just like,” and refers to some common condition which has re- 
mained in the unconscious. 

In hysteria identification is most frequently employed to ex- 
press a sexual community. The hysterical woman identifies her- 
self by her symptoms most readily — though not exclusively — 
with persons with whom she had had sexual rdations, or who 
have had sexual intercourse with the same persons as herself. 
Language takes cognizance of this tendency: two lovers are said 
to be “one.” In hysterical phantasy, as well as in dreams, identi- 
fication may ensue if one simply thinks of sexual relations; they 
need not necessarily become actual. The patient is merely fol- 
lowing the rules of the hysterical processes of thought when die 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


59 

expresses her jealousy of her friend (which, for that matter, 
she herself admits to be unjustified) by putting herself in her 
friend's place in her dream, and identifying herself with her 
by fabricating a symptom (the denied wish). One might further 
elucidate the process by saying: In the dream she puts herself in 
the place of her friend, because her friend has taken her own 
place in relation to her husband, and because she would like to 
take her friend's place in her husband's esteem. 7 

The contradiction of my theory of dreams on the part of an- 
other female patient, the most intelligent of all my dreamers, 
was solved in a simpler fashion, though still in accordance with 
the principle that the non-fulfilment of one wish signified the ful- 
filment of another. I had one day explained to her that a dream 
is a wish-fulfilment. On the following day she related a dream 
to the effect that she was travelling with her mother-in-law to 
the place in which they were both to spend the summer. Now I 
knew that she had violently protested against spending the sum- 
mer in the neighbourhood of her mother-in-law. I also knew that 
she had fortunately been able to avoid doing so, since she had 
recently succeeded in renting a house in a place quite remote 
from that to which her mother-in-law was going. And now the 
dream reversed this desired solution. Was not this a flat contra- 
diction of my theory of wish-fulfilment? One had only to draw 
the inferences from this dream in order to arrive at its interpreta- 
tion. According to this dream, I was wrong; but it was her wish 
that I should be wrong , and this wish the dream showed her as 
fulfilled . But the wish that I should be wrong, which was fulfilled 
in the theme of the country house, referred in reality to another 
and more serious matter. At that time I had inferred, from the 
material furnished by her analysis, that something of signifi- 
cance in respect to her illness must have occurred at a certain 
time in her life. She had denied this, because it was not present 

7 1 myself regret the inclusion of such passages from the psychopathology 
of hysteria, which, because of their fragmentary presentation, and because 
they are torn out of their context, cannot prove to be very illuminating. If 
these passages are capable of throwing any light upon the intimate relations 
between dreams and the psychoneuroses, they have served the intention 
with which I have included them. 


6o 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


in her memory. We soon came to see that I was right. Thus her 
wish that I should prove to be wrong, which was transformed 
into the dream that she was going into the country with her 
mother-in-law, corresponded with the justifiable wish that those 
things which were then only suspected had never occurred. 

Without an analysis, and merely by means of an assumption, 
I took the liberty of interpreting a little incident in the life of a 
friend, who had been my companion through eight classes at 
school. He once heard a lecture of mine, delivered to a small 
audience, on the novel idea that dreams are wish-fulfilments. He 
went home, dreamt that he had lost all Ms lawsuits — he was a 
lawyer — and then complained to me about it. I took refuge in 
the evasion: “One can’t win all one’s cases”; but I thought to 
myself: “If, for eight years, I sat as primus on the first bench, 
while he moved up and down somewhere in the middle of the 
class, may he not naturally have had the wish, ever since his 
boyhood, that I too might for once make a fool of myself?” 

Yet another dream of a more gloomy character was offered me 
by a female patient in contradiction of my theory of the wish- 
dream. This patient, a young girl, began as follows: “You re- 
member that my sister has now only one boy, Charles. She lost 
the elder one, Otto, while I was still living with her. Otto was my 
favourite; it was I who really brought him up. I like the other 
little fellow, too, but, of course, not nearly so much as his dead 
brother. Now I dreamt last night that I saw Charles lying dead 
before me. He was lying in his little coffin, his hands folded; 
there were candles all about; and, in short, it was just as it was 
at the time of little Otto’s death, which gave me such a shock. 
Now tell me, what does this mean? You know me — am I really 
so bad as to wish that my sister should lose the only child she 
has left? Or does the dream mean that I wish that Charles had 
died rather than Otto, whom I liked so much better?” 

I assured her that this latter interpretation was impossible. 
After some reflection, I was able to give her the interpretation 
of the dream, which she subsequently confirmed. I was able to 
do so because the whole previous history of the dreamer was 
known to me. 

Having become an orphan at an early age, the girl had been 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


61 


brought up in the home of a much older sister, and had met, 
among the friends and visitors who frequented the house, a man 
who made a lasting impression upon her affections. It looked 
for a time as though these barely explicit relations would end in 
marriage, but this happy culmination was frustrated by the 
sister, whose motives were never completely explained. After 
the rupture the man whom my patient loved avoided the house; 
she herself attained her independence some time after the death 
of little Otto, to whom, meanwhile, her affections had turned. 
But she did not succeed in freeing herself from the dependence 
due to her affection for her sister’s friend. Her pride bade her 
avoid him, but she found it impossible to transfer her love to the 
other suitors who successively presented themselves. Whenever 
the man she loved, who was a member of the literary profession, 
announced a lecture anywhere, she was certain to be found 
among the audience; and she seized every other opportunity of 
seeing him unobserved. I remembered that on the previous day 
she had told me that the Professor was going to a certain con- 
cert, and that she too was going, in order to enjoy the sight of 
him. This was on the day before the dream; and the concert was 
to be given on the day on which she told me the dream. I could 
now easily see the correct interpretation, and I asked her whether 
she could think of any particular event which had occurred 
after Otto’s death. She replied immediately: “Of course; the 
Professor returned then, after a long absence, and I saw him once 
more beside little Otto’s coffin.” It was just as I had expected. I 
interpreted the dream as follows: “If now the other boy were 
to die, the same thing would happen again. You would spend 
the day with your sister; the Professor would certainly come to 
offer his condolences, and you would see him once more under 
the same circumstances as before. The dream signifies nothing 
more than this wish of yours to see him again — a wish against 
which you are fighting inwardly. I know that you have the ticket 
for to-day’s concert in your bag. Your dream is a dream of im- 
patience; it has anticipated by several hours the meeting which 
is to take place to-day.” 

In order to disguise her wish she had obviously selected a situ- 
ation in which wishes of the sort are commonly suppressed — a 



62 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


situation so sorrowful that love is not even thought of. And yet 
it is entirely possible that even in the actual situation beside the 
coffin of the elder, more dearly loved boy, she had not been able 
to suppress her tender affection for the visitor whom she had 
missed for so long. 

A different explanation was found in the case of a similar 
dream of another patient, who in earlier life had been distin- 
guished for her quick wit and her cheerful disposition, and who 
still displayed these qualities, at all events in the free associa- 
tions which occurred to her during treatment. In the course of 
a longer dream, it seemed to this lady that she saw her fifteen- 
year-old daughter lying dead before her in a box. She was 
strongly inclined to use this dream-image as an objection to the 
theory of wish-fulfilment, although she herself suspected that 
the detail of the box must lead to a different conception of the 
dream. 8 For in the course of the analysis it occurred to her that 
on the previous evening the conversation of the people in whose 
company she found herself had turned on the English word 
“box,” and upon the numerous translations of it into German 
such as Schachtel (box), Logo (box at the theatre), Kasten 
(chest), Ohrjcige (box on the ear), etc. From other components 
of the same dream it was now possible to add the fact that the 
lady had guessed at the relationship between the English word 
“box” and the German Buchsc, and had then been haunted by 
the recollection that Biischse is used in vulgar parlance to de- 
note the female genitals. It was therefore possible, treating her 
knowledge of topographical anatomy with a certain indulgence, 
to assume that the child in the box signified a child in the moth- 
er’s womb. At this stage of the explanation she no longer denied 
that the picture in the dream actually corresponded with a wish 
of hers. Like so many other young women, she was by no means 
happy on finding that she was pregnant, and she had confessed 
to me more than once the wish that her child might die before 
its birth; in a fit of anger, following a violent scene with her hus- 
band, she had even struck her abdomen with her fists, in order 
to injure the child within. The dead child was, therefore, really 
the fulfilment of a wish, but a wish which had been put aside for 
8 As in the dream of the deferred supper and the smoked salmon. 



DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


63 

fifteen years, and it is not surprising that the fulfilment of the 
wish was no longer recognized after so long an interval. For 
there had been many changes in the meantime. 

The group of dreams (having as content the death of beloved 
relatives) to which belong the last two mentioned will be con- 
sidered again under the head of “Typical Dreams.” I shall then 
be able to show by new examples that in spite of their undesirable 
content all these dreams must be interpreted as wish-fulfilments. 
For the following dream, which again was told me in order to 
deter me from a hasty generalization of my theory, I am in- 
debted, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist of my ac- 
quaintance. “1 dream,” my informant tells me, “that I am walk- 
ing in front of my house with a lady on my arm . Here a closed 
carriage is waiting; a man steps up to me, shows me his authori- 
zation as a police officer, and requests me to follow him. I ask 
only for time in which to arrange my affairs” The jurist then 
asks me: “Can you possibly suppose that it is my wish to be 
arrested?” — “Of course not,” I have to admit. “Do you happen 
to know upon what charge you were arrested?” — “Yes; I be- 
lieve for infanticide,” — “Infanticide? But you know that only 
a mother can commit this crime upon her new-born child?” — 
“That is true.” 9 — “And under what circumstances did you dream 
this? What happened on the evening before?” — “I would rather 
not tell you — it is a delicate matter.” — “But I need it, otherwise 
we must forgo the interpretation of the dream.” — “Well, then, I 
will tell you. I spent the night, not at home, but in the house of 
a lady who means a great deal to me. When we awoke in the 
morning, something again passed between us. Then I went to 
sleep again, and dreamt what I have told you.” — “The woman 
is married?” — “Yes.” — “And you do not wish her to conceive?” 
— “No; that might betray us.” — “Then you do not practice 
normal coitus?” — “I take the precaution to withdraw before 
ejaculation.” — “Am I to* assume that you took this precaution 
several times during the night, and that in the morning you were 

0 It often happens that a dream is told incompletely, and that a recollec- 
tion of the omitted portions appears only in the course of the analysis. 
These portions, when subsequently fitted in, invariably furnish the key to 
the interpretation. Cf. Chapter VII 3 on forgetting in dreams. 



62 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


situation so sorrowful that love is not even thought of. And yet 
it is entirely possible that even in the actual situation beside the 
coffin of the elder, more dearly loved boy, she had not been able 
to suppress her tender affection for the visitor whom she had 
missed for so long. 

A different explanation was found in the case of a similar 
dream of another patient, who in earlier life had been distin- 
guished for her quick wit and her cheerful disposition, and who 
still displayed these qualities, at all events in the free associa- 
tions which occurred to her during treatment. In the course of 
a longer dream, it seemed to this lady that she saw her fifteen- 
year-old daughter lying dead before her in a box. She was 
strongly inclined to use this dream-image as an objection to the 
theory of wish-fulfilment, although she herself suspected that 
the detail of the box must lead to a different conception of the 
dream . 8 For in the course of the analysis it occurred to her that 
on the previous evening the conversation of the people in whose 
company she found herself had turned on the English word 
“box,” and upon the numerous translations of it into German 
such as Schachtcl (box), Logo (box at the theatre), Kasten 
(chest), Ohrfcige (box on the ear), etc. From other components 
of the same dream it was now possible to add the fact that the 
lady had guessed at the relationship between the English word 
“box” and tire German Biichse, and had then been haunted by 
the recollection that Bilschse is used in vulgar parlance to de- 
note the female genitals. It was therefore possible, treating her 
knowledge of topographical anatomy with a certain indulgence, 
to assume that the child in the box signified a child in the moth- 
er’s womb. At this stage of the explanation she no longer denied 
that the picture in the dream actually corresponded with a wish 
of hers. Like so many other young women, she was by no means 
happy on finding that she was pregnant, and she had confessed 
to me more than once the wish that her child might die before 
its birth; in a fit of anger, following a violent scene with her hus- 
band, she had even struck her abdomen with her fists, in order 
to injure the child within. The dead child was, therefore, really 
the fulfilment of a wish, but a wish which had been put aside for 
* As in the dream of the deferred supper and the smoked salmon. 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 63 

fifteen years, and it is not surprising that the fulfilment of the 
wish was no longer recognized after so long an interval. For 
there had been many changes in the meantime. 

The group of dreams (having as content the death of beloved 
relatives) to which belong the last two mentioned will be con- 
sidered again under the head of “Typical Dreams.” I shall then 
be able to show by new examples that in spite of their undesirable 
content all these dreams must be interpreted as wish-fulfilments. 
For the following dream, which again was told me in order to 
deter me from a hasty generalization of my theory, I am in- 
debted, not to a patient, but to an intelligent jurist of my ac- 
quaintance. “I dream,” my informant tells me, “that I am walk- 
ing in front of my house with a lady on my arm. Here a closed 
carriage is waiting; a man steps up to me, shows me his authori- 
zation as a police officer, and requests me to follow him. I ask 
only for time in which to arrange my affairs.” The jurist then 
asks me: “Can you possibly suppose that it is my wish to be 
arrested?” — “Of course not,” I have to admit. “Do you happen 
to know upon what charge you were arrested?” — “Yes; I be- 
lieve for infanticide.” — “Infanticide? But you know that only 
a mother can commit this crime upon her new-born child?” — 
“That is true.”" — “And under what circumstances did you dream 
this? What happened on the evening before?” — “I would rather 
not tell you — it is a delicate matter.” — “'But I need it, otherwise 
we must forgo the interpretation of the dream.” — “Well, then, I 
will tell you. I spent the night, not at home, but in the house of 
a lady who means a great deal to me. When we awoke in the 
morning, something again passed between us. Then I went to 
sleep again, and dreamt what I have told you.” — “The woman 
is married?” — “Yes.” — “And you do not wish her to conceive?” 
— “No; that might betray us.” — “Then you do not practice 
normal coitus?” — “I take the precaution to withdraw before 
ejaculation.” — “Am I to assume that you took this precaution 
several times during the night, and that in the morning you were 

0 It often happens that a dream is told incompletely, and that a recollec- 
tion of the omitted portions appears only in the course of the analysis. 
These portions, when subsequently fitted in, invariably furnish the key to 
the interpretation. Cf. Chapter VII, on forgetting in dreams. 



64 the interpretation of dreams 

not quite sure whether you had succeeded?” — “That might be 
so.” — “Then your dream is the fulfilment of a wish. By the 
dream you are assured that you have not begotten a child, or, 
what amounts to the same thing, that you have killed the child. 
I can easily demonstrate the connecting-links. Do you remember, 
a few days ago we were talking about the troubles of matrimony, 
and about the inconsistency of permitting coitus so long as no 
impregnation takes place, while at the same time any preventive 
act committed after the ovum and the semen meet and a foetus 
is formed is punished as a crime? In this connection we recalled 
the medieval controversy about the moment of time at which 
the soul actually enters into the foetus, since the concept of 
murder becomes admissible only from that point onwards. Of 
course, too, you know the gruesome poem by Lenau, which puts 
infanticide and birth-control on the same plane.” — “Strangely 
enough, I happened, as though by chance, to think of Lenau this 
morning.” — '‘Another echo of your dream. And now I shall show 
you yet another incidental wish-fulfilment in your dream. You 
walk up to your house with the lady on your arm. So you take her 
home, instead of spending the night at her house, as you did in 
reality. The fact that the wish-fulfilment, which is the essence of 
the dream, disguises itself hi such an unpleasant form, has per- 
haps more than one explanation. From my essay on the etiology 
of anxiety neurosis, you will see that I note coitus interrupts as 
one of the factors responsible for the development of neurotic fear. 
It would be consistent with this if, after repeated coitus of this 
kind, you were left in an uncomfortable frame of mind, which now 
becomes an element of the composition of your dream. You even 
make use of this uncomfortable state of mind to conceal the 
wish-fulfilment. At the same time, the mention of infanticide has 
not yet been explained. Why does this crime, which is peculiar 
to females, occur to you?” — “I will confess to you that I was 
involved in such an affair years ago. I was responsible for the 
fact that a girl tried to protect herself from the consequences of a 
liaison with me by procuring an abortion. I had nothing to do 
with the carrying out of her plan, but for a long time I was natu- 
rally worried in case the affair might be discovered.” — “I under- 
stand. This recollection furnished a second reason why the sup- 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 6$ 

position that you had performed coitus interruptus cl ums ily 
must have been painful to you.” 

A young physician, who heard this dream related in my lec- 
ture-room, must have felt that it fitted him, for he hastened to 
imitate it by a dream of his own, applying its mode of thinking 
to another theme. On the previous day he had furnished a state- 
ment of his income; a quite straightforward statement, because 
he had little to state. He dreamt that an acquaintance of his 
came from a meeting of the tax commission and informed him 
that all the other statements had passed unquestioned, but that 
his own had aroused general suspicion, with the result that he 
would be punished with a heavy fine. This dream is a poorly dis- 
guised fulfilment of the wish to be known as a physician with a 
large income. It also calls to mind the story of the young girl who 
was advised against accepting her suitor because he was a man 
of quick temper, who would assuredly beat her after their mar- 
riage. Her answer was: “I wish he would strike me I” Her wish 
to be married was so intense that she had taken into consideration 
the discomforts predicted for this marriage; she had even raised 
them to the plane of a wish. 

If I group together the very frequent dreams of this sort, which 
seem flatly to contradict my theory, in that they embody the 
denial of a wish or some occurrence obviously undesired, under 
the head of “counter-wish-dreams,” I find that they may all be 
referred to two principles, one of which has not yet been men- 
tioned, though it plays a large part in waking as well as dream- 
life. One of the motives inspiring these dreams is the wish that I 
should appear in the wrong. These dreams occur regularly in the 
course of treatment whenever the patient is in a state of resist- 
ance; indeed, I can with a great deal of certainty count on evok- 
ing such a dream once I have explained to the patient my theory 
that the dream is a wish-fulfilment . 10 Indeed, I have reason to 
expect that many of my readers will have such dreams, merely 
to fulfil the wish that I may prove to be wrong. The last dream 
which I shall recount from among those occurring in the course 

10 Similar “counter-wish-dreams” have been repeatedly reported to me 
within the last few years, by those who attend my lectures, as their reac- 
tion to their first encounter with the “wish-theory of dreams.” 



66 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


of treatment once more demonstrates this very thing. A young 
girl who had struggled hard to continue my treatment, against 
the will of her relatives and the authorities whom they had con- 
sulted, dreamt the following dream: At home she is forbidden 
to come to me any more. She then reminds me of the promise I 
made to treat her for nothing if necessary, and I tell her: “ I can 
show no consideration in money matters.” 

It is not at all easy in this case to demonstrate the fulfilment 
of a wish, but in all cases of this kind there is a second problem, 
the solution of which helps also to solve the first. Where does 
she get the words which she puts into my mouth? Of course, I 
have never told her anything of the kind ; but one of her brothers, 
the one who has the greatest influence over her, has been kind 
enough to make this remark about me. It is then the purpose of 
the dream to show that her brother is right; and she does not 
try to justify this brother merely in the dream; it is her purpose 
in life and the motive of her illness. 

A dream which at first sight presents peculiar difficulties for 
the theory of wish-fulfilment was dreamed by a physician (Aug. 
Starcke) and interpreted by him: “I have and see on the last 
phalange of my left forefinger a primary syphilitic affection." 

One may perhaps be inclined to refrain from analysing this 
dream, since it seems clear and coherent, except for its unwished- 
for content. However, if one takes the trouble to make an analy- 
sis, one learns that “primary affection” reduces itself to “prima 
affectio” (first love), and that the repulsive sore, in the words of 
Starke, proves to be “the representative of wish-fulfilments 
charged with intense emotion .” 11 

The other motive for counter-wish-dreams is so clear that 
there is a danger of overlooking it, as happened in my own case 
for a long time. In the sexual constitution of many persons there 
is a masochistic component, which has arisen through the conver- 
sion of the aggressive, sadistic component into its opposite. 
Such people are called “ideal” masochists if they seek pleasure 
not in the bodily pain which may be inflicted upon them, but in 
humiliation and psychic chastisement. It is obvious that such 
persons may have counter-wish-dreams and disagreeable dreams, 
11 Zentralblatt jur Psychorudyse, Jahrg. II, 1911-13. 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


67 

yet these are for them nothing more than -wish-fulfilments, which 
satisfy their masochistic inclinations. Here is such a dream: A 
young man, who in earlier youth greatly tormented his elder 
brother, toward whom he was homosexually inclined, but who 
has since undergone a complete change of character, has the 
following dream, which consists of three parts: (1) He is 
“ teased ” by his brother. (2) Two adults are caressing each other 
with homosexual intentions. (3) His brother has sold the busi- 
ness, the management of which the young man had reserved for 
his own future. From this last dream he awakens with the most 
unpleasant feelings; and yet it is a masochistic wish-dream, 
which might be translated: It would serve me right if my brother 
were to make that sale against my interests. It would be my 
punishment for all the torments he has suffered at my hands. 

I hope that the examples given above will suffice — until some 
further objection appears — to make it seem credible that even 
dreams with a painful content are to be analysed as wish-fulfil- 
ments. 12 Nor should it be considered a mere matter of chance 
that in the course of interpretation one always happens upon 
subjects about which one does not like to speak or think. The 
disagreeable sensation which such dreams arouse is of course 
precisely identical with the antipathy which would, and usually 
does, restrain us from treating or discussing such subjects — an 
antipathy which must be overcome by all of us if we find our- 
selves obliged to attack the problem of such dreams. But this 
disagreeable feeling which recurs in our dreams does not pre- 
clude the existence of a wish; everyone has wishes which he 
would not like to confess to others, which he does not care to ad- 
mit even to himself. On the other hand, we feel justified in con- 
necting the unpleasant character of all these dreams with the 
fact of dream-distortion, and in concluding that these dreams are 
distorted, and that their wish-fulfilment is disguised beyond 
recognition, precisely because there is a strong revulsion against 
— a will to repress — the subject-matter of the dream, or the 
wish created by it. Dream-distortion, then, proves in reality to 
be an act of the censorship. We shall have included everything 

12 1 will here observe that we have not yet disposed of this theme; we shall 
discuss it again later. 



68 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


which the analysis of disagreeable dreams has brought to light 
if we reword our formula thus: The dream is the (disguised) 
fulfilment of a ( suppressed , repressed) wish . 13 

Now there still remain to be considered, as a particular sub- 
order of dreams with painful content, the anxiety-dreams, the 
inclusion of which among the wish-dreams will be still less ac- 
ceptable to the uninitiated. But I can here deal very cursorily 
with the problem of anxiety-dreams; what they have to reveal 
is not a new aspect of the dream-problem; here the problem is 
that of understanding neurotic anxiety in general. The anxiety 
which we experience in dreams is only apparently explained by 
the dream-content. If we subject that content to analysis, we 
become aware that the dream-anxiety is no more justified by 

18 A great contemporary poet, who, I am told, will hear nothing of psycho- 
analysis and dream-interpretation, has nevertheless derived from his own 
experience an almost identical formula for the nature of the dream: “Un- 
authorized emergence of suppressed yearnings under false features and 
names” (C. Spitteler, Meine fruhesten Erlebnisee f in Siiddeutsche Monat- 
shefte, October, 1913). 

I will here anticipate by citing the amplification and modification of this 
fundamental formula propounded by Otto Rank: “On the basis of and 
with the aid of repressed infantile-sexual material, dreams regularly repre- 
sent as fulfilled current, and as a rule also erotic, wishes in a disguised and 
symbolic form” (Ein Traum, der sick selbst deutet). 

Nowhere have I said that I have accepted this formula of Rank’s. The 
shorter version contained in the text seems to me sufficient. But the fact 
that I merely mentioned Rank’s modification was enough to expose psycho- 
analysis to the oft-repeated reproach that it asserts that all dreams have a 
sexual content. If one understands this sentence as it is intended to be 
understood, it only proves how little conscientiousness our critics arc wont 
to display, and how ready our opponents are to overlook statements if they 
do not accord with their aggressive inclinations. Only a few pages back I 
mentioned the manifold wish-fulfilments of children’s dreams (to make an 
excursion on land or water, to make up for an omitted meal, etc.). Else- 
where I have mentioned dreams excited by thirst and the desire to evacu- 
ate, and mere comfort- or convenience-dreams. Even Rank does not make 
an absolute assertion. He says “as a rule also erotic wishes,” and this can 
be completely confirmed in the case of most dreams of adults. 

The matter has, however, a different aspect if we employ the word 
“sexual” in the sense of “Eros,” as the word is understood by psycho- 
analysts. But the interesting problem of whether all dreams are not pro- 
duced by “libidinal” motives (in opposition to “destructive” ones) has 
hardly been considered by our opponents. 


DISTORTION IN DREAMS 


69 

the dream-content than the anxiety in a phobia is justified by the 
idea to which the phobia is attached. For example, it is true 
that it is possible to fall out of a window, and that a certain care 
shoud be exercised when one is at a window, but it is not obvi- 
ous why the anxiety in the corresponding phobia is so great, 
and why it torments its victims more than its cause would war- 
rant. The same explanation which applies to the phobia applies 
also to the anxiety-dream. In either case the anxiety is only 
fastened on to the idea which accompanies it, and is really de- 
rived from another source. 

On account of this intimate relation of dream-anxiety to neu- 
rotic anxiety, the discussion of the former obliges me to refer to 
the latter. In a little essay on Anxiety Neurosis , 14 written in 1895, 
I maintain that neurotic anxiety has its origin in the sexual life, 
and corresponds to a libido which has been deflected from its 
object and has found no employment. The accuracy of this for- 
mula has since then been demonstrated with ever-increasing 
certainty. From it we may deduce the doctrine that anxiety- 
dreams are dreams of sexual content, and that the libido apper- 
taining to this content has been transformed into anxiety. Later 
on I shall have an opportunity of confirming this assertion by 
the analysis of several dreams of neurotics. In my further at- 
tempts to arrive at a theory of dreams I shall again have occasion 
to revert to the conditions of anxiety-dreams and their compati- 
bility with the theory of wish-fulfilment. 

14 Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses, p. 133, translated 
by A. A. Brill, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases, Monograph Series. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF 


DREAMS 


Having realized, as a result of analysing the dream of Irma’s 
injection, that the dream was the fulfilment of a wish, we were 
immediately interested to ascertain whether we had thereby dis- 
covered a general characteristic of dreams, and for the time 
being we put aside every other scientific problem which may 
have suggested itself in the course of the interpretation. Now 
that we have reached the goal on this one path, we may turn 
back and select a new point of departure for exploring dream- 
problems, even though we may for a time lose sight of the theme 
of wish-fulfilment, which has still to be further considered. 

Now that we are able, by applying our process of interpreta- 
tion, to detect a latent dream-content whose significance far sur- 
passes that of the manifest dream-content, we are naturally im- 
pelled to return to the individual dream-problems, in order to 
see whether the riddles and contradictions which seemed to elude 
us when we had only the manifest content to work upon may 
not now be satisfactorily solved. 

The opinions of previous writers on the relation of dreams to 
waking life, and the origin of the material of dreams, have not 
been given here. We may recall however three peculiarities of 
the memory in dreams, which have often been noted, but never 
explained: — 

i. That the dream clearly prefers the impressions of the last 
few days (Robert, Striimpell, Hildebrandt; also Weed- 
Hallam) ; 


70 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


71 

2. That it makes a selection in accordance with principles 
other than those governing onr waking memory, in that it 
recalls not essential and important, but subordinate and 
disregarded things; 

3. That it has at its disposal the earliest impressions of our 
childhood, and brings to light details from this period of 
life, which, again, seem trivial to us, and which in waking 
life were believed to have been long since forgotten. 1 

These peculiarities in the dream’s choice of material have, of 
course, been observed by previous writers in the manifest dream- 
content* 


A. RECENT AND INDIFFERENT IMPRESSIONS 
IN THE DREAM 

If I now consult my own experience with regard to the origin of 
the elements appearing in the dream-content, I must in the 
first place express the opinion that in every dream we may find 
some reference to the experiences of the preceding day . What- 
ever dream I turn to, whether my own or someone else’s, this 
experience is always confirmed. Knowing this, I may perhaps 
begin the work of interpretation by looking for the experience of 
the preceding day which has stimulated the dream; in many 
cases this is indeed the quickest way. With the two dreams which 
I subjected to a close analysis in the last chapter (the dreams of 
Irma’s injection, and of the uncle with the yellow beard) the 
reference to the preceding day is so evident that it needs no fur- 
ther elucidation. But in order to show how constantly this ref- 
erence may be demonstrated, I shall examine a portion of my 
own dream-chronicle. I shall relate only so much of the dreams 
as is necessary for the detection of the dream-source in question. 

1. I pay a call at a house to which I gain admittance only with 
difficulty , etc., and meanwhile I am keeping a woman waiting 
for me . 

1 It is evident that Roberts idea — that the dream is intended to rid our 
memory of the useless impressions which it has received during the day — 
is no longer tenable if indifferent memories of our childhood appear in our 
dreams with some degree of frequency. We should be obliged to conclude 
that our dreams generally perform their prescribed task very inadequately. 



72 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

Source: A conversation during the evening with a female 
relative to the effect that she would have to wait for a remit- 
tance for which she had asked, until . . . etc. 

2. I have written a monograph on a species ( uncertain ) of 
plant. 

Source: In the morning I had seen in a bookseller’s window 
a monograph on the genus Cyclamen. 

3. I see two women in the street, mother and daughter, the 
latter being a patient. 

Source: A female patient who is under treatment had told me 
in the evening what difficulties her mother puts in the way of her 
continuing the treatment. 

4. At S. and R.’s bookshop 1 subscribe to a periodical which 
costs 20 florins annually. 

Source: During the day my wife has reminded me that I still 
owe her 20 florins of her weekly allowance. 

5. I receive a communication from the Social Democratic 
Committee, in which 1 am addressed as a member. 

Source: I have received simultaneous communications from 
the Liberal Committee on Elections and from the president of 
the Humanitarian Society, of which latter I am actually a 
member. 

6. A man on a steep rock rising from the sea, in the manner 
of Bbcklin. 

Source: Dreyfus on Demi’s Island; also news from my rela- 
tives in England, etc. 

The question might be raised, whether a dream invariably 
refers to the events of the preceding day only, or whether the 
reference may be extended to include impressions from a longer 
period of time in the immediate past. This question is probably 
not of the first importance, but I am inclined to decide in favour 
of the exclusive priority of the day before the dream (the dream- 
day) . Whenever I thought I had found a case where an impres- 
sion two or three days old was the source of the dream, I was 
able to convince myself after careful investigation that this im- 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 73 

pression had been remembered the day before; that is, that a 
demonstrable reproduction on the day before had been inter- 
polated between the day of the event and the time of the dream; 
and further, I was able to point to the recent occasion which 
might have given rise to the recollection of the older impression. 
On the other hand, I was unable to convince myself that a regu- 
lar interval of biological significance (H. Swoboda gives the first 
interval of this kind as eighteen hours) elapses between the 
dream-exciting daytime impression and its recurrence in the 
dream. 

I believe, therefore, that for every dream a dream-stimulus 
may be found among those experiences “on which one has not yet 
slept.” 

Havelock Ellis, who has likewise given attention to this prob- 
lem, states that he has not been able to find any such periodicity 
of reproduction in his dreams, although he has looked for it. He 
relates a dream in which he found himself in Spain; he wanted 
to travel to a place called Daraus , Varans, or Zaraus . On awak- 
ing he was unable to recall any such place-names, and thought no 
more of the matter. A few months later he actually found the 
name Zaraus; it was that of a railway-station between San Se- 
bastian and Bilbao, through which he had passed in the train 
eight months (250 days) before the date of the dream. 

Thus the impressions of the immediate past (with the excep- 
tion of the day before the night of the dream) stands in the same 
relation to the dream-content as those of periods indefinitely 
remote. The dream may select its material from any period of 
life, provided only that a chain of thought leads back from the 
experiences of the day of the dream (the “recent” impressions) 
of that earlier period. 

But why this preference for recent impressions? We shall ar- 
rive at some conjectures on this point if we subject one of the 
dreams already mentioned to a more precise analysis. I select the 

Dream of the Botanical Monograph 

I have written a monograph on a certain plant . The book lies 
before me; I am just turning over a folded coloured plate . A 



THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 


74 

dried specimen of the plant, as though from a herbarium, is 
bound up with every copy. 


Analysis: 

In the morning I saw in a bookseller’s window a volume entitled 
The Gams Cyclamen, apparently a monograph on this plant. 

The cyclamen is my wife’s favourite flower. I reproach myself 
for remembering so seldom to bring her flowers, as she would 
like me to do. In connection with the theme of giving her flowers, 
I am reminded of a story which I recently told some friends of 
mine in proof of my assertion that we often forget in obedience 
to a purpose of the unconscious, and that forgetfulness always 
enables us to form a deduction about the secret disposition of 
the forgetful person. A young woman who has been accustomed 
to receive a bouquet of flowers from her husband on her birthday 
misses this token of affection on one of her birthdays, and bursts 
into tears. The husband comes in, and cannot understand why 
she is crying until she tells him: “To-day is my birthday.” He 
claps his hand to bis forehead, and exclaims: “Oh, forgive me, 
I had completely forgotten it!” and proposes to go out imme- 
diately in order to get her flowers. But she refuses to be con- 
soled, for she sees in her husband’s forgetfulness a proof that 
she no longer plays the same part in his thoughts as she formerly 
did. This Frau L. met my wife two days ago, told her that she 
was feeling well, and asked after me. Some years ago she was a 
patient of mine. 

Supplementary facts: I did once actually write something 
like a monograph on a plant, namely, an essay on the coca plant, 
which attracted the attention of K. Roller to the anaesthetic 
properties of cocaine. I had hinted that the alkaloid might be 
employed as an anaesthetic, but I was not thorough enough to 
pursue the matter farther. It occurs to me, too, that on the 
morning of the day following the dream (for the interpretation 
of which I did not find time until the evening) I had thought of 
cocaine in a kind of day-dream. If I were ever afflicted with 
glaucoma, I would go to Berlin, and there undergo an operation, 
Incognito, in the house of my Berlin friend, at the hands of a 
surgeon whom he would recommend. The surgeon, who would 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 75 

not know the name of his patient, would boast, as usual, how 
easy these operations had become since the introduction of 
cocaine; and I should not betray the fact that I myself had a 
share in this discovery. With this phantasy were connected 
thoughts of how awkward it really is for a physician to claim the 
professional services of a colleague. I should be able to pay the 
Berlin eye specialist, who did not know me, like anyone else. 
Only after recalling this day-dream do I realize that there is 
concealed behind it the memory of a definite event. Shortly after 
Roller’s discovery, my father contracted glaucoma; he was op- 
erated on by my friend Dr. Koenigstein, the eye special. Dr. 
Roller was in charge of the cocaine anaesthetization, and he 
made the remark that on this occasion all the three persons who 
had been responsible for the introduction of cocaine had been 
brought together. 

My thoughts now pass on to the time when I was last re- 
minded of the history of cocaine. This was a few days earlier, 
when I received a Festschrift , a publication in which grateful 
pupils had commemorated the jubilee of their teacher and lab- 
oratory director. Among the titles to fame of persons connected 
with the laboratory I found a note to the effect that the discovery 
of the anaesthetic properties of cocaine had been due to R. 
Roller.' Now I suddenly become aware that the dream is con- 
nected with an experience of the previous evening. I had just 
accompanied Dr. Roenigstein to his home, and had entered into 
a discussion of a subject which excites me greatly whenever it is 
mentioned. While I was talking with him in the entrance-hall 
Professor Gartner and his young wife came up. I could not refrain 
from congratulating them both upon their blooming appearance. 
Now Professor Gartner is one of the authors of the Festschrift of 
which I have just spoken, and he may well have reminded me 
of it. And Frau L., of whose birthday disappointment I spoke 
a little way back, had been mentioned, though of course in an- 
other connection, in my conversation with Dr. Roenigstein. 

I shall now try to elucidate the other determinants of the 
dream-content. A dried specimen of the plant accompanies the 
monograph, as though it were a herbarium . And herbarium re- 
minds me of the “gymnasium.” The director of our “gymnasium” 


76 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

once called the pupils of the upper classes together, in order that 
they might examine and clean the “gymnasium” herbarium. 
Small insects had been found — book-worms. The director seemed 
to have little confidence in my ability to assist, for he entrusted 
me with only a few of the pages. Iknow to this day that there were 
crucifers on them. My interest in botany was never very great. 
At my preliminary examination in botany I was required to 
identify a crucifer, and failed to recognize it; had not my 
theoretical knowledge come to my aid, I should have fared badly 
indeed. Crucifers suggest composites. The artichoke is really a 
composite, and in actual fact one which I might call my favourite 
flower. My wife, more thoughtful than I, often brings this 
favourite flower of mine home from the market. 

I see the monograph which I have written lying before me. 
Here again there is an association. My friend wrote to me yes- 
terday from Berlin: “I am thinking a great deal about your 
dream-book. I see it lying before me, completed, and I turn the 
pages.” How I envied him this power of vision! If only I could 
see it lying before me, already completed! 

The folded coloured plate. When I was a medical student I 
suffered a sort of craze for studying monographs exclusively. In 
spite of my limited means, I subscribed to a number of the 
medical periodicals, whose coloured plates afforded me much 
delight. I was rather proud of this inclination to thoroughness. 
When I subsequently began to publish books myself, I had to 
draw the plates for my own treatises, and I remember one of 
them turned out so badly that a well-meaning colleague ridi- 
culed me for it. With this is associated, I do not exactly know 
how, a very early memory of my childhood. My father, by way 
of a jest, once gave my elder sister and myself a book containing 
coloured plates (the book was a narrative of a journey through 
Persia) in order that we might destroy it. From an educational 
point of view this was hardly to be commended. I was at the 
time five years old, and my sister less than three, and the picture 
of us two children blissfully tearing the book to pieces (I should 
add, like an artichoke, leaf by leaf), is almost the only one from 
this period of my life which has remained vivid in my memory. 
When I afterwards became a student, I developed a conspicuous 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 77 

fondness for collecting and possessing books (an analogy to the 
inclination for studying from monographs, a hobby alluded to 
in my dream-thoughts, in connection with cyclamen and arti- 
choke). I became a book-worm (cf. herbarium ) . Ever since I 
have been engaged in introspection I have always traced this 
earliest passion of my life to this impression of my childhood: 
or rather, I have recognized in this childish scene a “screen or 
concealing memory” for my subsequent bibliophilia. 2 And of 
course I learned at an early age that our passions often become 
our misfortunes. When I was seventeen, I ran up a very con- 
siderable account at the bookseller’s, with no means with which 
to settle it, and my father would hardly accept it as an excuse 
that my passion was at least a respectable one. But the mention 
of this experience of my youth brings me back to my conversa- 
tion with my friend Dr. Koenigstein on the evening preceding 
the dream; for one of the themes of this conversation was the 
same old reproach — that I am much too absorbed in my hobbies . 

For reasons which are not relevant here I shall not continue 
the interpretation of this dream, but will merely indicate the 
path which leads to it. In the course of the interpretation I was 
reminded of my conversation with Dr. Koenigstein, and, indeed, 
of more than one portion of it. When I consider the subjects 
touched upon in this conversation, the meaning of the dream 
immediately becomes clear to me. All the trains of thought 
which have been started — my own inclinations, and those of my 
wife, the cocaine, the awkwardness of securing medical treat- 
ment from one’s own colleagues, my preference for monographi- 
cal studies, and my neglect of certain subjects, such as botany — 
all these are continued in and lead up to one branch or another 
of this widely-ramified conversation. The dream once more as- 
sumes the character of a justification, of a plea for my rights 
(like the dream of Irma’s injection, the first to be analysed) ; it 
even continues the theme which that dream introduced, and dis- 
cusses it in association with the new subject-matter which has 
been added in the interval between the two dreams. Even the 
dream’s apparently indifferent form of expression at once ac- 
quires a meaning. Now it means: “I am indeed the man who has 
2 Cf. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life . 


78 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

written, that valuable and successful treatise (on cocaine),” just 
as previously I declared in self-justification: “I am after dl a 
thorough and industrious student”; and in both instances I find 
the meaning: “I can allow myself this.” But I may dispense with 
the further interpretation of the dream, because my only purpose 
in recording it was to examine the relation of the dream-content 
to the experience of the previous day which arouses it. As long 
as I know only the manifest content of this dream, only one 
relation to any impression of the day is obvious; but after I 
have completed the interpretation, a second source of the dream 
becomes apparent in another experience of the same day. The 
first of these impressions to which the dream refers is an indiffer- 
ent one, a subordinate circumstance. I see a book in a shop 
window whose title holds me for a moment, but whose contents 
would hardly interest me. The second experience was of great 
psychic value; I talked earnestly with my friend, the eye spe- 
cialist, for about an hour; I made allusions in this conversation 
which must have ruffled the feelings of both of us, and which in 
me awakened memories in connection with which I was aware 
of a great variety of inner stimuli. Further, this conversation was 
broken off unfinished, because some acquaintances joined us. 
What, now, is the relation of these two impressions of the day 
to one another, and to the dream which followed during the 
night? 

In the manifest dream-content I find merely an illusion to the 
indifferent impression, and I am thus able to reaffirm that the 
dream prefers to take up into its content experiences of a non- 
essential character. In the dream-interpretation, on the contrary, 
everything converges upon the important and justifiably dis- 
turbing event. If I judge the sense of the dream in the only cor- , 
rect way, according to the latent content which is brought to 
light in the analysis, I find that I have unwittingly lighted upon 
a new and important discovery. I see that the puzzling theory 
that the dream deals only with the worthless odds and ends of 
the day’s experiences has no justification; I am also compelled to 
contradict the assertion that the psychic life of the waking state 
is not continued in the dream, and that hence, the dream wastes 
our psychic energy on trivial material. The very opposite is true; 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OE DREAMS 79 

what has claimed our attention during the day do min ates our 
dream-thoughts also, and we take pains to dream only in con- 
nection with such matters as have given us food for thought 
during the day. 

Perhaps the most immediate explanation of the fact tb^t I 
dream of the indifferent impression of the day, while the iripres- 
sion which has with good reason excited me causes me to dream, 
is that here again we are dealing with the phenomenon of dream- 
distortion, which we have referred to as a psychic force playing 
the part of a censorship. The recollection of the monograph on 
the genus cyclamen is utilized as though it were an. allusion to 
the conversation with my friend, just as the mention of my pa- 
tient’s friend in the dream of the deferred supper is represented 
by the allusion “smoked salmon.” The only question is, by what 
intermediate links can the impression of the monograph come 
to assume the relation of allusion to the conversation with the 
eye specialist, since such a relation is not at first perceptible? In 
the example of the deferred supper the relation is evident at the 
outset; “smoked salmon,” as the favourite dish of the patient’s 
friend, belongs to the circle of ideas which the friend’s person- 
ality would naturally evoke in the mind of the dreamer. In our 
new example we are dealing with two entirely separate impres- 
sions, which at first glance seem to have nothing in common, 
except indeed that they occur on the same day. The monograph 
attracts my attention in the morning: in the evening I take part 
in the conversation. The answer furnished by the analysis is as 
follows: Such relations between the two impressions as do not 
exist from the first are established subsequently between the 
idea-content of the one impression and the idea-content of the 
other. I have already picked out the intermediate links em- 
phasized in the course of writing the analysis. Only under some 
outside influence, perhaps the recollection of the flowers missed 
by Frau L., would the idea of the monograph on the cyclamen 
have attached itself to the idea that the cyclamen is my wife’s 
favourite flower. I do not believe that these inconspicuous 
thoughts would have sufficed to evoke a dream. 

“There needs no ghost , my lord , come from the grave 
To tell us this/ 9 


So 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


as we read in Hamlet. But behold 1 in the analysis I am reminded 
that the name of the man who interrupted our conversation was 
Gartner (gardener), and that I thought his wife looked bloom- 
ing; indeed, now I even remember that one of my female pa- 
tients, who bears the pretty name of Flora, was for a time the 
main subject of our conversation. It must have happened that 
by means of these intermediate links from the sphere of botanical 
ideas the association was effected between the two events of 
the day, the indifferent one and the stimulating one. Other rela- 
tions were then established, that of cocaine for example, which 
can with perfect appropriateness form a link between the person 
of Dr. Koenigstein and the botanical monograph which I have 
written, and thus secure the fusion of the two circles of ideas, 
so that now a portion of the first experience may be used as an 
allusion to the second. 

I am prepared to find this explanation attacked as either 
arbitrary or artificial. What would have happened if Professor 
Gartner and his blooming wife had not appeared, and if the 
patient who was under discussion had been called, not Flora, 
but Anna? And yet the answer is not hard to find. If these 
thought-relations had not been available, others would probably 
have been selected. It is easy to establish relations of this sort, 
as the jocular questions and conundrums with which we amuse 
ourselves suffice to show. The range of wit is unlimited. To go a 
step farther: if no sufficiently fertile associations between the 
two impressions of the day could have been established, the 
dream would simply have followed a different course; another 
of the indifferent impressions of the day, such as come to us in 
multitudes and are forgotten, would have taken the place of 
the monograph in the dream, would have formed an association 
with the content of the conversation, and would have represented 
this in the dream. Since it was the impression of the monograph 
and no other that was fated to perform this function, this im- 
pression was probably that most suitable for the purpose. One 
need not, like Lessing’s Hdnschen Schlau, be astonished tha t 
“only the rich people of the world possess the most money.” 

Still, the psychological process by which, according to our 
exposition, the indifferent experience substitutes itself for the 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 8 1 

psychologically important one seems to us odd and open to 
question. In a later chapter we shall undertake the task of mak- 
ing the peculiarities of this seemingly incorrect operation more 
intelligible. Here we are concerned only with the result of this 
process, which we were compelled to accept by constantly re- 
curring experiences in the analysis of dreams. In this process it 
is as though, in the course of the intermediate steps, a displace- 
ment occurs — let us say, of the psychic accent — until ideas of 
feeble potential, by taking over the charge from ideas which 
have a stronger initial potential, reach a degree of intensity 
which enables them to force their way into consciousness. Such 
displacements do not in the least surprise us when it is a question 
of the transference of affective magnitudes or of motor activities. 
That the lonely spinster transfers her affection to animals, that 
the bachelor becomes a passionate collector, that the soldier 
defends a scrap of coloured cloth — his flag — with his life-blood, 
that in a love-affair a clasp of the hands a moment longer than 
usual evokes a sensation of bliss, or that in Othello a lost hand- 
kerchief causes an outburst of rage — all these are examples of 
psychic displacements which to us seem incontestable. But if, 
by the same means, and in accordance with the same funda- 
mental principles, a decision is made as to what is to reach our 
consciousness and what is to be withheld from it — that is to 
say, what we are to think — this gives us the impression of mor- 
bidity, and if it occurs in waking life we call it an error of 
thought. We may here anticipate the result of a discussion which 
will be undertaken later, namely, that the psychic process which 
we have recognized in dream-displacement proves to be not a 
morbidly deranged process, but one merely differing from the 
normal, one of a more primary nature. 

Thus we interpret the fact that the dream-content takes up 
r emnan ts of trivial experiences as a manifestation of dream-dis- 
tortion (by displacement), and we thereupon remember that we 
have recognized this dream-distortion as the work of a censorship 
operating between the two psychic instances. We may therefore 
expect tha t dream-analysis will constantly show us the real and 
psychically sig n ifi c ant source of the dream in the events of the 
day, the memory of which has transferred its accentuation to 


82 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


some indifferent memory. This conception is in complete op- 
position to Robert's theory, which consequently has no further 
value for us. The fact which Robert was trying to explain 
simply does not exist; its assumption is based on a misunder- 
standing, on a failure to substitute the real meaning of the dream 
for its apparent meaning. A further objection to Robert’s doc- 
trine is as follows: If the task of the dream were really to rid 
our memory, by means of a special psychic activity, of the 
“slag” of the day's recollections, our sleep would perforce be 
more troubled, engaged in more strenuous work, than we can 
suppose it to be, judging by our waking thoughts. For the num- 
ber of the indifferent impressions of the day against which we 
should have to protect our memory is obviously immeasurably 
large; the whole night would not be long enough to dispose of 
them all. It is far more probable that the forgetting of the in- 
different impressions takes place without any active interference 
on the part of our psychic powers. 

Still, something cautions us against taking leave of Robert's 
theory without further consideration. We have left unexplained 
the fact that one of the indifferent impressions of the day — in- 
deed, even of the previous day — constantly makes a contribution 
to the dream-content. The relations between this impression and 
the real source of the dream in the unconscious do not always 
exist from the outset; as we have seen, they are established 
subsequently, while the dream is actually at work, as though to 
serve the purpose of the intended displacement. Something, 
therefore, must necessitate the opening up of connections in the 
direction of the recent but indifferent impression; this impres- 
sion must possess some quality that gives it a special fitness. 
Otherwise it would be just as easy for the dream-thoughts to 
shift their accentuation to some inessential component of their 
own sphere of ideas. 

Experiences such as the following show us the way to an 
explanation: If the day has brought us two or more experiences 
which are worthy to evoke a dream, the dream will blend the 
allusion of both into a single whole: it obeys a compulsion to 
make them into a single whole . For example: One summer after- 
noon I entered a railway carriage in which I found two acquaint- 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES 03 ? DREAMS 83 

ances of mine who were unknown to one another. One of them 
was an influential colleague, the other a member of a distin- 
guished family which I had been attending in my professional 
capacity. I introduced the two gentlemen to each other; but 
during the long journey they conversed with each other through 
me, so that I had to discuss this or that topic now with one, now 
with the oilier. I asked my colleague to recommend a mutual 
acquaintance who had just begun to practice as a physician. He 
replied that he was convinced of the young man’s ability, but 
that his undistinguished appearance would make it difficult for 
him to obtain patients in the upper ranks of society. To this I 
rejoined: “That is precisely why he needs recommendation.” A 
little later, turning to my other fellow-traveller, I inquired after 
the health of his aunt — the mother of one of my patients — who 
was at this time prostrated by a serious illness. On the night 
following this journey I dreamt that the young friend whom I 
had asked one of my companions to recommend was in a fash- 
ionable drawing-room, and with all the bearing of a man of 
the world was making — before a distinguished company, in 
which I recognized all the rich and aristocratic persons of my 
acquaintance — a funeral oration over the old lady (who in my 
dream had already died) who was the aunt of my second fellow- 
traveller. (I confess frankly that I had not been on good terms 
with this lady.) Thus my dream had once more found the con- 
nection between the two impressions of the day, and by means 
of the two had constructed a unified situation. 

In view of many similar experiences I am persuaded to ad- 
vance the proposition that a dream works under a kind of com- 
pulsion which forces it to combine into a unified whole all the 
sources of dream-stimulation which are offered to it. 3 In a sub- 
sequent chapter (on the function of dreams) we shall consider 
this impulse of combination as part of the process of condensa- 
tion, another primary psychic process. 

I shall now consider the question whether the dream-exciting 
source to which our analysis leads us must always be a recent 

8 The tendency of the dream at work to blend everything present of inter- 
est into a single transaction has already been noticed by several authors, for 
instance, by Delage and Delboeuf. 



84 the interpretation of dreams 

(and significant) event, or whether a subjective experience — 
that is to say, the recollection of a psychologically significant 
event, a train of thought — may assume the r61e of a dream- 
stimulus. The very definite answer, derived from numerous an- 
alyses, is as follows: The stimulus of the dream may be a sub- 
jective transaction, which has been made recent, as it were, by 
the mental activity of the day. 

And this is perhaps the best time to summarize in schematic 
form the different conditions under which the dream-sources 
are operative. 

The source of a dream may be: — 

(a) A recent and psychologically significant event which is 
directly represented in the dream. 4 

(5) Several recent and significant events, which are com- 
bined by the dream into a single whole. 5 

(c) One or more recent and significant events, which are 
represented in the dream-content by allusion to a contemporary 
but indifferent event. 6 

(d) A subjectively significant experience (recollection, train 
of thought), which is constantly represented in the dream by 
allusion to a recent but indifferent impression. 7 

As may be seen, in dream-interpretation the condition is al- 
ways fulfilled that one component of the dream-content repeats 
a recent impression of the day of the dream. The component 
which is destined to be represented in the dream may either be- 
long to the same circle of ideas as the dream-stimulus itself (as 
an essential or even an inessential element of the same) , or it 
may originate in the neighbourhood of an indifferent impression, 
which has been brought by more or less abundant associations 
into relation with the sphere of the dream-stimulus. The ap- 
parent multiplicity of these conditions results merely from the 
alternative , that a displacement has or has not occurred , and it 
may here be noted that this alternative enables us to explain the 
contrasts of the dream quite as readily as the medical theory of 

4 The dream of Irina’s injection; the dream of the friend who is my unde. 

6 The dream of the funeral oration delivered by the young physidan, 

6 The dream of the botanical monograph. 

7 The dreams of my patients during analysis are mostly of this kind. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 85 

the dream explains the series of states from the partial to the 
complete waking of the brain cells. 

In considering this series of sources we note further that the 
psychologically significant but not recent element (a train of 
thought, a recollection) may be replaced for the purposes of 
dream-formation by a recent but psychologically indifferent 
element, provided the two following conditions are fulfilled: (i) 
the dream-content preserves a connection with things recently 
experienced; (2) the dream-stimulus is still a psychologically 
significant event. In one single case (a) both these conditions 
are fulfilled by the same impression. If we now consider that 
these same indifferent impressions, which are utilized for the 
dream as long as they are recent, lose this qualification as soon 
as they are a day (or at most several days) older, we are obliged 
to assume that the very freshness of an impression gives it a 
certain psychological value for dream-formation, somewhat 
equivalent to the value of emotionally accentuated memories or 
trains of thought. Later on, in the light of certain psychological 
considerations, we shall be able to divine the explanation of this 
importance of recent impressions in dream-formation . 8 

Incidentally our attention is here called to the fact that at 
night, and unnoticed by our consciousness, important changes 
may occur in the material comprised by our ideas and memories. 
The injunction that before making a final decision in any matter 
one should sleep on it for a night is obviously fully justified. But 
at this point we find that we have passed from the psychology 
of dreaming to the psychology of sleep, a step which there will 
often be occasion to take. 

At this point there arises an objection which threatens to 
invalidate the conclusions at which we have just arrived. If 
indifferent impressions can find their way into the dream only 
so long as they are of recent origin, how does it happen that in 
the dream-content we find elements also from earlier periods of 
our lives, which at the time when they were still recent pos- 
sessed, as Striimpell puts it, no psychic value, and which, there- 
fore, ought to have been forgotten long ago ; elements, that is, 
which are neither fresh nor psychologically significant? 

5 Cf, Chap. VII on Transference. 


86 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


This objection can be disposed of completely if we have 
recourse to the results of the psychoanalysis of neurotics. The 
solution is as follows: The process of shifting and rearrangement 
which replaces material of psychic significance by material which 
is indifferent (whether one is dreaming or thinking) has already 
taken place in these earlier periods of life, and has since become 
fixed in the memory. Those elements which were originally in- 
different are in fact no longer so, since they have acquired the 
value of psychologically significant material. That which has 
actually remained indifferent can never be reproduced in the 
dream. 

From the foregoing exposition the reader may rightly con- 
clude that I assert that there are no indifferent dream-stimuli, 
and therefore no guileless dreams. This I absolutely and uncon- 
ditionally believe to be the case, apart from the dreams of chil- 
dren, and perhaps the brief dream-reactions to nocturnal sen- 
sations. Apart from these exceptions, whatever one dreams is 
either plainly recognizable as being psychically significant, or 
it is distorted and can be judged correctly only after complete 
interpretation, when it proves after all to be of psychic sig- 
nificance. The dream never concerns itself with trifles; we do 
not allow sleep to be disturbed by trivialities . 0 Dreams which 
are apparently guileless turn out to be the reverse of innocent if 
one takes the trouble to interpret them; if I may be permitted 
the expression, they all show “the mark of the beast.” Since this 
is another point on which I may expect contradiction, and since 
I am glad of an opportunity to show dream-distortion at work, 
I shall here subject to analysis a number of “guileless dreams” 
from my collection. 


I 

An intelligent and refined young woman, who in real life is dis- 
tinctly reserved, one of those people of whom one says that “still 

9 Havelock Ellis, a kindly critic of The Interpretation of Dreams, writes in 
The World of Dreams (p. 169) : “From this point on, not many of us will 
be able to follow F.” But Mr. Ellis has not undertaken any analyses of 
dreams, and will not believe how unjustifiable it is to judge them by the 
manifest dream-content. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 87 

waters run deep,” relates the following dream: “I dreamt that 1 
arrived at the market too late , and could get nothing pom either 
the butcher or the greengrocer woman ” Surely a guileless dream, 
but as it has not the appearance of a real dream I induce her to 
relate it in detail. Her report then runs as follows: She goes to 
the market with her cook, who carries the basket . The butcher 
tells her , after she has asked Mm for something : “That is no 
longer to be obtained ” and wants to give her something else, 
with the remark : “ That is good , too” She refuses, and goes to 
the greengrocer woman . The latter tries to sell her a peculiar 
vegetable, which is bound up in bundles, and is black in colour . 
She says; “ I don’t know that, I won’t take it.” 

The connection of the dream with the preceding day is simple 
enough. She had really gone to the market too late, and had been 
unable to buy anything. The meat-shop was already closed, comes 
into one’s mind as a description of the experience. But wait, 
is not that a very vulgar phrase which — or rather, the opposite 
of which — denotes a certain neglect with regard to a man’s cloth- 
ing? 10 The dreamer has not used these words; she has perhaps 
avoided them; but let us look for the interpretation of the de- 
tails contained in the dream. 

When in a dream something has the character of a spoken 
utterance — that is, when it is said or heard, not merely thought — 
and the distinction can usually be made with certainty — then it 
originates in the utterances of waking life, which have, of 
course, been treated as raw material, dismembered, and slightly 
altered, and above all removed from their context. 11 In the work 
of interpretation we may take such utterances as our starting- 
point. Where, then, does the butcher’s statement, That is no 
longer to be obtained, come from? From myself ; I had explained 
to her some days previously “that the oldest experiences of 
childhood are no longer to be obtained as such, but will be re- 
placed in the analysis by ‘transferences’ and dreams.” Thus, I 
am the butcher; and she refuses to accept these transferences 
10 Its meaning is: “Your fly is undone.” (Trans.) 

13 Cf. what is said of speech in dreams in the chapter on The Dream-Work . 
Only one of the writers on the subject — Delbceuf — seems to have recog- 
nized the origin of the speeches heard in dreams, he compares them with 
clicMs. 


8S THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

to the present of old ways of thinking and feeling. Where does 
her dream utterance, 1 don't know that, 1 won't take it, come 
from? For the purposes of the analysis this has to be dissected. 
“I don’t know that” she herself had said to her cook, with whom 
she had a dispute on the previous day, but she had then added: 
Behave yourself decently . Here a displacement is palpable; of 
the two sentences which she spoke to her cook, she included the 
insignificant one in her dream; but the suppressed sentence, 
“Behave yourself decently 1” alone fits in with die rest of the 
dream-content. One might use the words to a man who was 
making indecent overtures, and had neglected “to close his 
meat-shop.” That we have really hit upon the trail of the in- 
terpretation is proved by its agreement with the allusions made 
by the incident with the greengrocer woman. A vegetable which 
is sold tied up in bundles (a longish vegetable, as she subse- 
quently adds), and is also black; what can this be but a dream- 
combination of asparagus and black radish? I need not inter- 
pret asparagus to the initiated; and the other vegetable, too 
(think of the exclamation: “Blacky, save yourself 1”), seems to 
me to point to the sexual theme at which we guessed in the be- 
ginning, wnen we wanted to replace the story of the dream by 
“the meat-shop is closed.” We are not here concerned with the 
full meaning of the dream; so much is certain, that it is full of 
meaning and by no means guileless. 13 

II 

Another guileless dream of the same patient, which in some re- 
spects is a pendant to the above. Her husband asks her: 

12 For the curious, I may remark that behind the dream there is hidden a 
phantasy of indecent, sexually provoking conduct on my part, and of repul- 
sion on the part of the lady. If this interpretation should seem preposterous, 
I would remind the reader of the numerous cases in which physicians have 
been made the object of such charges by hysterical women, with whom the 
same phantasy has not appeared in a distorted form as a dream, but has 
become undisguisedly conscious and delusional. — With this dream the 
patient began her psychoanalytical treatment. It was only later that I 
learned that with this dream she repeated the initial trauma in which her 
neurosis originated, and since then I have noticed the same behaviour in 
other persons who in their childhood were victims of sexual attacks, and 
now, as it were, wish in their dreams for them to be repeated. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 89 

“Oughtn’t we to have the piano tuned ?” She replies: “It’s not 
worth while , the hammers would have to be rebuffed as well” 
Again we have the reproduction of an actual event of the pre- 
ceding day. Her husband had asked her such a question, and 
she had answered it in such words. But what is the meaning of 
her dreaming it? She says of the piano that it is a disgusting old 
box which has a bad tone; it belonged to her husband before 
they were married , 13 etc., but the key to the true solution lies in 
the phrase: It isn’t worth while . This has its origin in a call paid 
yesterday to a woman friend. She was asked to take off her coat, 
but declined, saying: “Thanks, it isn’t worth while, I must go in 
a moment.” At this point I recall that yesterday, during the 
analysis, she suddenly took hold of her coat, of which a button 
had come undone. It was as though she meant to say: “Please 
don’t look in, it isn’t worth while.” Thus box becomes chest , and 
the interpretation of the dream leads to the years when she was 
growing out of her childhood, when she began to be dissatisfied 
with her figure. It leads us back, indeed, to earlier periods, if 
we take into consideration the disgusting and the bad tone , and 
remember how often in allusions and in dreams the two small 
hemispheres of the female body take the place — as a substitute 
and an antithesis — of the large ones. 

Ill 

I will interrupt the analysis of this dreamer in order to insert a 
short, innocent dream which was dreamed by a young man. He 
dreamt that he was putting on his winter overcoat again; this 
was terrible . The occasion for this dream is apparently the sud- 
den advent of cold weather. On more careful examination we 
note that the two brief fragments of the dream do not fit to- 
gether very well, for what could be terrible about wearing a 
thick or heavy coat in cold weather? Unfortunately for the in- 
nocency of this dream, the first association, under analysis, 
yields the recollection that yesterday a lady had confidentially 
confessed to him that her last child owed its existence to the 
splitting of a condom. He now reconstructs his thoughts in ac- 

18 A substitute by the opposite, as will be clear after analysis. 


90 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

cordance with this suggestion: A thin condom is dangerous, a 
thick one is bad. The condom is a “pullover” ( Uebcrzieher = 
literally pullover), for it is pulled over something: and Ueber- 
sieher is the German term for a light overcoat. An experience 
like that related by the lady would indeed be “terrible” for an 
unmarried man. 

We will now return to our other innocent dreamer. 

IV 

She puts a candle into a candlestick; but the candle is broken, so 
that it does not stand up. The girls at school say she is clumsy; 
but she replies that it is not her fault. 

Here, too, there is an actual occasion for the dream; the day 
before she had actually put a candle into a candlestick; but this 
one was not broken. An obvious symbolism has here been em- 
ployed. The candle is an object which excites the female genitals; 
its being broken, so that it does not stand upright, signifies im- 
potence on the man’s part (if is not her fault). But does this 
young woman, carefully brought up, and a stranger to all 
obscenity, know of such an application of the candle? By chance 
she is able to tell how she came by this information. While pad- 
dling a canoe on the Rhine, a boat passed her which contained 
some students, who were singing rapturously, or rather yelling: 
“When the Queen of Sweden, behind closed shutters, with the 
candles of Apollo. . . .” 

She does not hear or else understand the last word. Her hus- 
band was asked to give her the required explanation. These 
verses are then replaced in the dream-content by the innocent 
recollection of a task which she once performed clumsily at her 
boarding-school, because of the closed shutters . The connection 
between the theme of masturbation and that of impotence is 
clear enough. “Apollo” in the latent dream-content connects this 
dream with an earlier one in which the virgin Pallas figured. All 
this is obviously not innocent. 

V 

Lest it may seem too easy a matter to draw conclusions from 
dreams concerning the dreamer’s real circumstances, I add an- 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 9 1 

other dream originating with the same person, which once more 
appears innocent, “I dreamt of doing something , 33 she relates, 
“which I actually did during the day, that is to say , I filled a 
little trunk so full of books that I had difficulty in closing it. 
My dream was just like the actual occurrence 33 Here the dreamer 
herself emphasizes the correspondence between the dream and 
the reality. All such criticisms of the dream, and comments on 
the dream, although they have found a place in the waking 
thoughts, properly belong to the latent dream-content, as further 
examples will confirm. We are told, then, that what the dream 
relates has actually occurred during the day. It would take us 
too far afield to show how we arrive at the idea of making use 
of the English language to help us in the interpretation of this 
dream. Suffice it to say that it is again a question of a little box 
(cf. p. 62, the dream of the dead child in the box) which has 
been filled so full that nothing can go into it. 

In all these “innocent” dreams the sexual factor as the motive 
of the censorship is very prominent. But this is a subject of 
primary significance, which we must consider later. 


B. INFANTILE EXPERIENCES AS 
THE SOURCE OF DREAMS 

As the third of the peculiarities of the dream-content, we have 
adduced the fact, in agreement with all other writers on the 
subject (excepting Robert), that impressions from our childhood 
may appear in dreams, which do not seem to be at the disposal 
of the waking memory. It is, of course, difficult to decide how 
seldom or how frequently this occurs, because after waking the 
origin of the respective elements of the dream is not recognized. 
The proof that we are dealing with impressions of our childhood 
must thus be adduced objectively, and only in rare instances do 
the conditions favour such proof. The story is told by A. Maury, 
as being particularly conclusive, of a man who decides to visit 
his birthplace after an absence of twenty years. On the night 
before his departure he dreams that he is in a totally unfamiliar 
locality, and that he there meets a strange man with whom he 


92 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

holds a conversation. Subsequently, upon his return home, he is 
able to convince himself that this strange locality really exists 
in the vicinity of his home, and the strange man in the dream 
turns out to be a Mend of his dead father’s, who is living in the 
town. This is, of course, a conclusive proof that in his childhood 
he had seen both the man and the locality. The dream, more- 
over, is to be interpreted as a dream of impatience, like the 
dream of the girl who carries in her pocket her ticket for a con- 
cert, the dream of the child whose father had promised him an 
excursion to the Hameau (p. 40), and so forth. The motives 
which reproduce just these impressions of childhood for the 
dreamer cannot, of course, be discovered without analysis. 

One of my colleagues, who attended my lectures, and who 
boasted that his dreams were very rarely subject to distortion, 
told me that he had sometime previously seen, in a dream, his 
former tutor in bed with his nurse, who had remained in the 
household until his eleventh year. The actual location of this 
scene was realized even in the dream. As he was greatly inter- 
ested, he related the dream to his elder brother, who laughingly 
confirmed its reality. The brother said that he remembered the 
affair very distinctly, for he was six years old at the time. The 
lovers were in the habit of making him, the elder boy, drunk with 
beer whenever circumstances were favourable to their nocturnal 
intercourse. The younger child, our dreamer, at that time three 
years of age, slept in the same room as the nurse, but was not 
regarded as an obstacle. 

In yet another case it may be definitely established, without 
the aid of dream-interpretation, that the dream contains ele- 
ments from childhood — namely, if the dream is a so-called 
perennial dream, one which, being first dreamt in childhood, 
recurs again and again in adult years. I may add a few examples 
of this sort to those already known, although I have no personal 
knowledge of perennial dreams. A physician, in his thirties, tells 
me that a yellow lion, concerning which he is able to give the 
precisest information, has often appeared in his dream-life, from 
his earliest childhood up to the present day. This lion, known 
to him from his dreams, was one day discovered in natura, as a 
long-forgotten china animal. The young man then learned from 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 93 

his mother that the lion had been his favourite toy in early child- 
hood, a fact which he himself could no longer remember. 

If we now turn from the manifest dream-content to the dream- 
thoughts which are revealed only on analysis, the experiences of 
childhood may be found to recur even in dreams whose content 
would not have led us to suspect anything of the sort. I owe a 
particularly delightful and instructive example of such a dream 
to my esteemed colleague of the “yellow lion.” After reading 
Nansen’s account of his polar expedition, he dreamt that he was 
giving the intrepid explorer electrical treatment on an ice-floe 
for the sciatica of which the latter complained! During the an- 
alysis of this dream he remembered an incident of his childhood, 
without which the dream would be wholly unintelligible. When 
he was three or four years of age he was one day listening at- 
tentively to the conversation of his elders; they were talking of 
exploration, and he presently asked his father whether explora- 
tion was a bad illness. He had apparently confounded Reisen 
(journey, trips) with Reissen (gripes, tearing pains), and the 
derision of his brothers and sisters prevented his ever forgetting 
the humiliating experience. 

We have a precisely similar case when, in the analysis of the 
dream of the monograph on the genus cyclamen, I stumble upon 
a memory, retained from childhood, to the effect that when I 
was five years old my father allowed me to destroy a book em- 
bellished with coloured plates. It will perhaps be doubted 
whether this recollection really entered into the composition of 
the dream-content, and it may be suggested that the connection 
was established subsequently by the analysis. But the abundance 
and intricacy of the associative connections vouch for the truth 
of my explanation: cyclamen — favourite flower — favourite dish 
— artichoke; to pick to pieces like an artichoke, leaf by leaf (a 
phrase which at that time one heard daily, a propos of the divid- 
ing up of the Chinese empire) ; herbarium — bookworm, whose 
favourite food is books. I can further assure the reader that the 
ultimate meaning of the dream, which I have not given here, is 
most intimately connected with the content of the scene of 
childish destruction. 

In another series of dreams we learn from analysis that the 


94 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

very wish which has given rise to the dream, and whose fulfilment 
the dream proves to be, has itself originated in childhood, so 
that one is astonished to find that the child with all his impulses 
survives in the dream . 

1 shall now continue the interpretation of a dream which has 
already proved instructive: I refer to the dream in which my 
friend R. is my unde. We have carried its interpretation far 
enough for the wish-motive — the wish to be appointed profes- 
sor — to assert itself palpably; and we have explained the affec- 
tion felt for my friend R. in the dream as the outcome of 
apposition to, and defiance of, the two colleagues who appear in 
the dream-thoughts. The dream was my own; I may, therefore, 
continue the analysis by stating that I did not feel quite satisfied 
with the solution arrived at. I knew that my opinion of these 
colleagues, who were so badly treated in my dream-thoughts, 
would have been expressed in very different language in my 
waking life; the intensity of the wish that I might not share 
their fate as regards the appointment seemed to me too slight 
fully to account for the discrepancy between my dream-opinion 
and my waking opinion. If the desire to be addressed by another 
title were really so intense it would be proof of a morbid ambi- 
tion, which I do not think I cherish, and which I believe I was 
far from entertaining. I do not know how others who think they 
know me would judge me; perhaps I really was ambitious; but 
if I was, my ambition has long since been transferred to objects 
other than the rank and title of Professor cxlraordinarius. 

Whence, then, the ambition which the dream has ascribed to 
me? Here I am reminded of a story which I heard often in my 
childhood, that at my birth an old peasant woman had prophe- 
sied to my happy mother (whose first-born I was) that she had 
brought a great man into the world. Such prophecies must be 
made very frequently; there are so many happy and expectant 
mothers, and so many old peasant women, and other old women 
who, since their mundane powers have deserted them, turn their 
eyes toward the future; and the prophetess is not likely to suffer 
for her prophecies. Is it possible that my thirst for greatness has 
originated from this source? But here I recollect an impression 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 95 

from the later years of my childhood, which might serve even 
better as an explanation. One evening, at a restaurant on the 
Prater, where my parents were accustomed to take me when 
I was eleven or twelve years of age, we noticed a man who was 
going from table to table and, for a small sum, improvising 
verses upon any subject that was given him. I was sent to bring 
the poet to our table, and he showed his gratitude. Before ask- 
ing for a subject he threw off a few rhymes about myself, and 
told us that if he could trust his inspiration I should probably 
one day become a “minister.” I can still distinctly remember the 
impression produced by this second prophecy. It was in the days 
of the “bourgeois Ministry”; my father had recently brought 
home the portraits of the bourgeois university graduates, Herbst, 
Giskra, Unger, Berger and others, and we illuminated the house 
in their honour. There were even Jews among them; so that 
every diligent Jewish schoolboy carried a ministerial portfolio in 
his satchel. The impression of that time must be responsible for 
the fact that until shortly before I went to the university I 
wanted to study jurisprudence, and changed my mind only at 
the last moment. A medical man has no chance of becoming a 
minister. And now for my dream: It is only now that I begin 
to see that it translates me from the somber present to the 
hopeful days of the bourgeois Ministry, and completely fulfils 
what was then my youthful ambition. In treating my two es- 
timable and learned colleagues, merely because they are Jews, 
so badly, one as though he were a simpleton, and the other as 
though he were a criminal, I am acting as though I were the 
Minister; I have put myself in his place. What a revenge I take 
upon his Excellency! He refuses to appoint me Professor ex~ 
traordinarius , and so in my dream I put myself in his place. 

In another case I note the fact that although the wish that 
excites the dream is a contemporary wish it is nevertheless 
greatly reinforced by memories of childhood. I refer to a series 
of dreams which are based on the longing to go to Rome. For 
a long time to come I shall probably have to satisfy this longing 
by means of dreams, since at the season of the year when I 
should be able to travel Rome is to be avoided for reasons of 



96 the interpretation op dreams 

health . 14 Thus I once dreamt that I saw the Tiber and the bridge 
of Saint’ Angelo from the window of a railway carriage; pres- 
ently the train started, and I realized that I had never entered 
the city at all. The view that appeared in the dream was 
modelled after a well-known engraving which I had casually 
noticed the day before in the drawing-room of one of my pa- 
tients. In another dream someone took me up a hill and showed 
me Rome half shrouded in mist, and so distant that I was 
astonished at the distinctness of the view. The content of this 
dream is too rich to be fully reported here. The motive, “to see 
the promised land afar,” is here easily recognizable. The city 
which I thus saw in the midst is Liibeck; the original of the hill 
is the Gleichenberg. In a third dream I am at last in Rome. To 
my disappointment the scenery is anything but urban: it con- 
sists of a little stream of black water, on one side of which are 
black rocks, while on the other are meadows with large white 
flowers. I notice a certain Herr Zucker ( with whom I am super- 
ficially acquainted), and resolve to ask him to show me the way 
into the city. It is obvious that I am trying in vain Msec in my 
dream a city which I have never seen in my waking life. If I 
resolve the landscape into its elements, the white flowers point 
to Ravenna, which is known to me, and which once, for a time, 
replaced Rome as the capital of Italy. In the marshes around 
Ravenna we had found the most beautiful water-lilies in the 
midst of black pools of water; the dream makes them grow in 
the meadows, like the narcissi of our own Aussee, because we 
found it so troublesome to cull them from the water. The black 
rock so close to the water vividly recalls the valley of the Tepl 
at Karlsbad. “Karlsbad” now enables me to account for the 
peculiar circumstance that I ask Herr Zucker to show me the 
way. In the material of which the dream is woven I am able to 
recognize two of those amusing Jewish anecdotes which conceal 
such profound and, at times, such bitter worldly wisdom, and 
which we are so fond of quoting in our letters and conversation. 
One is the story of the “constitution”; it tells how a poor Jew 
sneaks into the Karlsbad express without a ticket; how he is 

14 1 long ago learned that the fulfilment of such wishes only called for a 
little courage, and I then became a zealous pilgrim to Rome. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 97 

detected, and is treated more and more harshly by the conductor 
at each succeeding call for tickets; and how, when a friend whom 
he meets at one of the stations during his miserable journey asks 
him where he is going, he answers: “To Karlsbad — if my con- 
stitution holds out.” Associated in memory with this is another 
story about a Jew who is ignorant of French, and who has ex- 
press instructions to ask in Paris for the Rue Richelieu. Paris 
was for many years the goal of my own longing, and I regarded 
the satisfaction with which I first set foot on the pavements of 
Paris as a warrant that I should attain to the fulfilment of other 
wishes also. Moreover, asking the way is a direct allusion to 
Rome, for, as we know, “all roads lead to Rome.” And further, 
the name Zucker (sugar) again points to Karlsbad, whither we 
send persons afflicted with the constitutional disease, diabetes 
(Zucker krankheit, sugar-disease). The occasion for this dream 
was the proposal of my Berlin friend that we should meet in 
Prague at Easter. A further association with sugar and diabetes 
might be found in the matters which I had to discuss with him. 

A fourth dream, occurring shortly after the last-mentioned, 
brings me back to Rome. I see a street comer before me, and am 
astonished that so many German placards should be posted 
there. On the previous day, when writing to my friend, I had 
told him, with truly prophetic vision, that Prague would prob- 
ably not be a comfortable place for German travellers. The 
dream, therefore, expressed simultaneously the wish to meet him 
in Rome instead of in the Bohemian capital, and the desire, 
which probably originated during my student days, that the 
German language might be accorded more tolerance in Prague. 
As a matter of fact, I must have understood the Czech language 
in the first years of my childhood, for I was born in a small 
village in Moravia, amidst a Slav population. A Czech nursery 
rhyme, which I heard in my seventeenth year, became, without 
effort on my part, so imprinted upon my memory that I can 
repeat it to this day, although I have no idea of its meaning. 
Thus in these dreams also there is no lack of manifold relations 
to the impressions of my early childhood. 

During my last Italian journey, which took me past Lake 
Trasimenus, I at length discovered, after I had seen the Tiber, 



98 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

and had reluctantly turned back some fifty miles from Rome, 
what a reinforcement my longing for the Eternal City had re- 
ceived from the impressions of my childhood. I had just con- 
ceived a plan of travelling to Naples via Rome the following 
year when this sentence, which I must have read in one of our 
German classics, occurred to me : 15 “It is a question which of the 
two paced to and fro in his room the more impatiently after he 
had conceived the plan of going to Rome — -Assistant Headmaster 
Winckelmann or the great General Hannibal.” I myself had 
walked in Hannibars footsteps; like him I was destined never 
to see Rome, and he too had gone to Campania when all were 
expecting him in Rome. Hannibal, with whom I had achieved 
this point of similarity, had been my favourite hero during my 
years at the “gymnasium”; like so many boys of my age, I be- 
stowed my sympathies in the Punic war not on the Romans, but 
on the Cathaginians. Moreover, when I finally came to realize 
the consequences of belonging to an alien race, and was forced 
by the anti-Semitic feeling among my class-mates to take a 
definite stand, the figure of the Semitic commander assumed still 
greater proportions in my imagination. Hannibal and Rome sym- 
bolized, in my youthful eyes, the struggle between the tenacity 
of the Jews and the organization of the Catholic Church. The 
significance for our emotional life which the anti-Semitic move- 
ment has since assumed helped to fix the thoughts and impres- 
sions of those earlier days. Thus the desire to go to Rome has in 
my dream-life become the mask and symbol for a number of 
warmly cherished wishes, for whose realization one had to work 
with the tenacity and single-mindedness of the Punic general, 
though their fulfilment at times seemed as remote as Hannibal’s 
lifelong wish to enter Rome. 

And now, for the first time, I happened upon the youthful 
experience which even to-day still expresses its power in all these 
emotions and dreams. I might have been ten or twelve years old 
when my father began to take me with him on his walks, and in 
his conversation to reveal his views on the things of this world. 

18 The writer in whose works I found this passage was probably Jean Paul 
Richter. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES 01 DREAMS 99 

Thus it was that he once told me the following incident, in order 
to show me that I had been born into happier times than he: 
<f When I was a young man, I was walking one Saturday along 
the street in the village where you were born; I was well-dressed, 
with a new fur cap on my head. Up comes a Christian, who 
knocks my cap into the mud, and shouts, ‘Jew, get off the pave- 
mentl 5 55 — “And what did you do?” — “I went into the street and 
picked up the cap,” he calmly replied. That did not seem heroic 
on the part of the big, strong man who was leading me, a little 
fellow, by the hand. I contrasted this situation, which did not 
please me, with another, more in harmony with my sentiments — 
the scene in which Hannibal's father, Hamilcar Barcas, made 
his son swear before the household altar to take vengeance on 
the Romans . 16 Ever since then Hannibal has had a place in my 
phantasies. 

I think I can trace my enthusiasm for the Carthaginian gen- 
eral still further back into my childhood, so that it is probably 
only an instance of an already established emotional relation 
being transferred to a new vehicle. One of the first books which 
fell into my childish hands after I learned to read was Thiers 5 
Consulate and Empire . I remember that I pasted on the flat 
backs of my wooden soldiers little labels bearing the names of 
the Imperial marshals, and that at that time Massena (as a 
Jew, Menasse) was already my avowed favourite . 17 This prefer- 
ence is doubtless also to be explained by the fact of my having 
been born a hundred years later, on the same date. Napoleon 
himself is associated with Hannibal through the crossing of the 
Alps. And perhaps the development of this martial ideal may be 
traced yet farther back, to the first three years of my childhood, 
to wishes which my alternately friendly and hostile relations 
with a boy a year older than myself must have evoked in the 
weaker of the two playmates. 

The deeper we go into the analysis of dreams, the more often 

In the first edition of this book I gave here the name “Hasdrubal,” an 
amazing error, which I explained in my Psychopathology of Everyday Life* 
17 The Jewish descent of the Marshal is somewhat doubtful. 



100 THE INTERPRETATION 03? DREAMS 

are we put on to the track of childish experiences which play the 
part of dream-sources in the latent dream-content. 

We have learned that dreams very rarely reproduce memories 
in such a manner as to constitute, unchanged and unabridged, 
the sole manifest dream-content. Nevertheless, a few authentic 
examples which show such reproduction have been recorded, 
and I can add a few new ones, which once more refer to scenes 
of childhood. In the case of one of my patients a dream once 
gave a barely distorted reproduction of a sexual incident, which 
was immediately recognized as an accurate recollection. The 
memory of it had never been completely lost in the waking life, 
but it had been greatly obscured, and it was revivified by the 
previous work of analysis. The dreamer had at the age of twelve 
visited a bedridden schoolmate, who had exposed himself, prob- 
ably only by a chance movement in bed. At the sight of the 
boy’s genitals he was seized by a kind of compulsion, exposed 
himself, and took hold of the member of the other boy- who, 
however, looked at him in surprise and indignation, whereupon 
he became embarrassed and let it go. A dream repeated this 
scene twenty-three years later, with all the details of the ac- 
companying emotions, changing it, however, in this respect, that 
the dreamer played the passive instead of the active role, while 
the person of the schoolmate was replaced by a contemporary. 

As a rule, of course, a scene from childhood is represented in 
the manifest dream-content only by an illusion, and must be 
disentangled from the dream by interpretation. The citation of 
examples of this kind cannot be very convincing, because any 
guarantee that they are really experiences of childhood is lack- 
ing; if they belong to an earlier period of life, they are no 
longer recognized by our memory. The conclusion that such 
childish experiences recur at all in dreams is justified in psycho- 
analytic work by a great number of factors, which in their com- 
bined results appear to be sufficiently reliable. But when, for the 
purposes of dream-interpretation, such references to childish ex- 
periences are torn out of their context, they may not perhaps 
seem very impressive, especially where I do not even give all 
the material upon which the interpretation is based. However, I 
shall not let this deter me from giving a few examples. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


IOI 


I 

With one of my female patients all dreams have the character of 
“hurry”; she is hurrying so as to be in time, so as not to miss 
her train, and so on. In one dream she has to visit a girl friend; 
her mother had told her to ride and not walk; she runs , however , 
and keeps on calling . The material that emerged in the analysis 
allowed one to recognize a memory of childish romping, and, 
especially for one dream, went back to the popular childish game 
of rapidly repeating the words of a sentence as though it was 
all one word. All these harmless jokes with little friends were 
remembered because they replaced other less harmless ones. 18 

II 

The following dream was dreamed by another female patient: 
She is in a large room in which there are all sorts of machines; 
it is rather like what she would imagine an orthopaedic institute 
to be . She hears that 1 am pressed for time , and that she must 
undergo treatment along with five others. But she resists , and 
is unwilling to lie down on the bed — or whatever it is — which is 
intended for her . She stands in a corner , and waits for me to say 
“It is not true.” The others, meanwhile, laugh at her, saying it 
is all foolishness on her part. At the same time , it is as though 
she were called upon to make a number of little squares. 

The first part of the content of this dream is an allusion to the 
treatment and to the transference 19 to myself. The second con- 
tains an allusion to a scene of childhood; the two portions are 
connected by the mention of the bed. The orthopaedic institute 
is an allusion to one of my talks, in which I compared the treat- 
ment, with regard to its duration and its nature, to an ortho- 
paedic treatment. At the beginning of the treatment I had to tell 
her that for the present I had little time to give her, but that 
later on I would devote a whole hour to her daily. This aroused 

18 [In the original this paragraph contains many plays on the word “Hetz” 
(hurry, chase, scurry, game, etc.)— Trans.3 

19 [This word is here used in the psychoanalytical sense. — Trans.] 



102 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

in her the old sensitiveness, which is a leading characteristic of 
children who are destined to become hysterical. Their desire for 
love is insatiable. My patient was the youngest of six brothers 
and sisters (hence, with five others), and as such her father’s 
favourite, but in spite of this she seems to have felt that her 
beloved father devoted far too little time and attention to her. 
Her waiting for me to say “It is not true” was derived as fol- 
lows: A little tailor’s apprentice had brought her a dress, and 
she had given him the money for it. Then she asked her husband 
whether she would have to pay the money again if the boy were 
to lose it. To tease her, her husband answered “Yes” (the 
teasing in the dream) , and she asked again and again, and waited 
for him to say “It is not true.” The thought of the latent dream- 
content may now be construed as follows: Will she have to pay 
me double the amount when I devote twice as much time to her? 
— a thought which is stingy or filthy (the uncleanliness of child- 
hood is often replaced in dreams by greed for money; the word 
“filthy” here supplies the bridge) . If all the passage referring 
to her waiting until I say “It is not true” is intended in the 
dream as a circumlocution for the word “dirty,” the standing- 
in-thc-corncr and not lying-down-on-the-bcd are in keeping with 
this world, as component parts of a scene of her childhood in 
which she had soiled her bed, in punishment for which she was 
■put into the corner, with a warning that papa would not love her 
any more, whereupon her brothers and sisters laughed at her, 
etc. The little squares refer to her young niece, who showed her 
the arithmetical trick of writing figures in nine squares (I think) 
in such a way that on being added together in any direction they 
make fifteen. 


ra 

Here is a man’s dream: He sees two boys tussling with each other; 
they are cooper’s boys, as he concludes from the tools which are 
lying about; one of the boys has thrown the other down; the 
prostrate boy is wearing ear-rings with blue stones. He runs to- 
wards the assailant with lifted cane, in order to chastise him. 
The boy takes refuge behind a woman, as though she were his 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OE DREAMS 103 

mother, who is standing against a wooden fence . She is the wife 
of a day-labourer, and she turns her back to the man who is 
dreaming. Finally she turns about and stares at him with a hor- 
rible look, so that he runs away in terror; the red flesh of the 
lower lid seems to stand out from her eyes . 

This dream has made abundant use of trivial occurrences 
from the previous day, in the course of which he actually saw 
two boys in the street, one of whom threw the other down. When 
he walked up to them in order to settle the quarrel, both of them 
took to cheir heels. Cooper’s boys — this is explained only by a 
subsequent dream, in the analysis of which he used the proverbial 
expression: “To knock the bottom out of the barrel” Ear-rings 
with blue stones, according to his observation, are worn chiefly 
by prostitutes . This suggests a familiar doggerel rhyme about 
two boys: “The other boy was called Marie”: that is, he was a 
girl. The woman standing by the fence: after the scene with the 
two boys he went for a walk along the bank of the Danube and, 
taking advantage of being alone, urinated against a wooden 
fence. A little farther on a respectably dressed, elderly lady 
smiled at him very pleasantly, and wanted to hand him her card 
with her address. 

Since, in the dream, the woman stood as he had stood while 
urinating, there is an allusion to a woman urinating, and this 
explains the “horrible look” and the prominence of the red flesh, 
which can only refer to the genitals gaping in a squatting pos- 
ture; seen in childhood, they had appeared in later recollection 
as “proud flesh ” as a “wound” The dream unites two occasions 
upon which, as a little boy, the dreamer was enabled to see the 
genitals of little girls, once by throwing the little girl down, and 
once while the child was urinating ; and, as is shown by another 
association, he had retained in his memory the punishment ad- 
ministered or threatened by his father on account of these mani- 
festations of sexual curiosity. 


IV 

A great mass of childish memories, which have been hastily 
combined into a phantasy, may be found behind the following 


104 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

dream of an elderly lady: She goes out in a hurry to do some 
shopping. On the Graben 30 she sinks to her knees as though she 
had broken down . A number of people collect around her , espe- 
cially cab-drivers, but no one helps her to get up. She makes 
many vain attempts; finally she must have succeeded, for she is 
put into a cab which is to take her home . A large, heavily laden 
basket (something like a market-basket) is thrown after her 
through the window . 

This is the woman who is always harassed in her dreams, just 
as she used to be harassed when a child. The first situation of the 
dream is apparently taken from the sight of a fallen horse, just as 
“broken down” points to horse-racing. In her youth she was a 
rider; still earlier she was probably also a horse . With the idea 
of falling down is connected her first childish reminiscence of 
the seventeen-year-old son of the hall porter, who had an epi- 
leptic seizure in the street and was brought home in a cab. Of 
this, of course, she had only heard, but the idea of epileptic fits, 
of falling down, acquired a great influence over her phantasies, 
and later on influenced the form of her own hysterical attacks. 
When a person of the female sex dreams of falling, this almost 
always has a sexual significance; she becomes a <{ fallen woman” 
and, for the purpose of the dream under consideration, this inter- 
pretation is probably the least doubtful, for she falls in the 
Graben, the street in Vienna which is known as the concourse of 
prostitutes. The market-basket admits of more than one inter- 
pretation; in the sense of refusal (German, Korb = basket = 
snub, refusal) it reminds her of the many snubs which she at 
first administered to her suitors and which, she thinks, she her- 
self received later. This agrees with the detail: no one tvill help 
her up, which she herself interprets as “being disdained.” Fur- 
ther, the market-basket recalls phantasies which have already 
appeared in the course of analysis, in which she imagines that 
she has married far beneath her station and now goes to the 
market as a market-woman. Lastly, the market-basket might be 
interpreted as the mark of a servant . This suggests further 
memories of her childhood — of a cook who was discharged be- 
20 [A street in Vienna.— Trans .] 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 10$ 

cause she stole ; she, too, sank to her knees and begged for mercy. 
The dreamer was at that time twelve years of age. Then emerge? 
a recollection of a chamber-maid, who was dismissed because 
she had an affair with the coachman of the household, who, inci- 
dentally, married her afterwards. This recollection, therefore, 
gives us a clue to the cab-drivers in the dream (who, in opposition 
to the reality, do not stand by the fallen woman). But there 
still remains to be explained the throwing of the basket; in par- 
ticular, why is it thrown through the window? This reminds her 
of the forwarding of luggage by rail, to the custom of Fensterln 21 
in the country, and to trivial impressions of a summer resort, of 
a gentleman w T ho threw some blue plums into the window of a 
lady’s room, and of her little sister, who was frightened because 
an idiot who was passing looked in at the window. And now, 
from behind all this emerges an obscure recollection from her 
tenth year of a nurse in the country to whom one of the men- 
servants made love (and whose conduct the child may have 
noticed), and who was “sent packing,” “thrown out,” together 
with her lover (in the dream we have the expression: “thrown 
into”) ; an incident which we have been approaching by several 
other paths. The luggage or box of a servant is disparagingly 
described in Vienna as “seven plums.” “Pack up your seven 
plums and get out!” 

My collection, of course, contains a plethora of such patients 7 
dreams, the analysis of which leads back to impressions of child* 
hood, often dating back to the first three years of life, which 
are remembered obscurely, or not at all. But it is a questionable 
proceeding to draw conclusions from these and apply them to 
dreams in general, for they are mostly dreams of neurotic, and 
especially hysterical, persons; and the part played in these 
dreams by childish scenes might be conditioned by the nature of 
the neurosis, and not by the nature of dreams in general. In the 
21 [j Fensterln is the custom, now falling into disuse, found in rural districts 
of the German Schwarzwald, of lovers who woo their sweethearts at theif 
bedroom windows, to which they ascend by means of a ladder, enjoying 
such intimacy that the relation practically amounts to a trial marriage. The 
reputation of the young woman never suffers on account of Fensterln , 
unless she becomes intimate with too many suitors. — Trans.] 


106 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

interpretation of my own dreams, however, which is assuredly 
not undertaken on account of grave symptoms of illness, it hap- 
pens just as frequently that in the latent dream-content I am 
unexpectedly confronted with a scene of my childhood, and that 
a whole series of my dreams will suddenly converge upon the 
paths proceeding from a single childish experience. I have al- 
ready given examples of this, and I shall give yet more in differ- 
ent connections. Perhaps I cannot close this chapter more fit- 
tingly than by citing several dreams of my own, in which recent 
events and long-forgotten experiences of my childhood appear 
together as dream-sources. 

I. After I have been travelling, and have gone to bed hungry 
and tired, the prime necessities of life begin to assert their claims 
in sleep, and I dream as follows: I go into a kitchen in order to 
ask for some pudding. There three women are standing, one of 
whom is the hostess; she is rolling something in her hands, as 
though she were making dumplings. She replies that I must wait 
until she has finished (not distinctly as a speech). I become 
impatient, and go away affronted. I want to put on an overcoat; 
but the first I try on is too long. I take it off, and ant somewhat 
astonished to find that it is trimmed with fur. A second coat has 
a long strip of cloth with a Turkish design sewn into it. A stranger 
with a long face and a short, pointed beard comes up and pre- 
vents me from putting it on, declaring that it belongs to him . I 
now show him that it is covered all over with Turkish embroid- 
eries. He asks : “ How do the Turkish (drawings, strips of cloth 
. . .) concern you?” But we soon become quite friendly. 

In the analysis of this dream I remember, quite unexpectedly, 
the first novel which I ever read, or rather, which I began to read 
from the end of the first volume, when I was perhaps thirteen 
years of age. I have never learned the name of the novel, or that 
of its author, but the end remains vividly in my memory. The 
hero becomes insane, and continually calls out the names of the 
three women who have brought the greatest happiness and the 
greatest misfortune into his life. Pelagie is one of these names. 
I still do not know what to make of this recollection during the 
analysis. Together with the three women there now emerge the 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OR DREAMS 


107 

three Parcae, who spin the fates of men, and I know that one oi 
the three women, the hostess in the dream, is the mother who 
gives life and who, moreover, as in my own case, gives the child 
its first nourishment. Love and hunger meet at the mother’s 
breast. A young man — so runs an anecdote— who became a 
great admirer of womanly beauty, once observed, when the con- 
versation turned upon the handsome wet-nurse who had suckled 
him as a child, that he was sorry that he had not taken better 
advantage of his opportunities. I am in the habit of using the 
anecdote to elucidate the factor of retrospective tendencies in 
the mechanism of the psychoneuroses. — One of the Parcae, then, 
is rubbing the palms of her hands together, as though she were 
making dumplings. A strange occupation for one of the Fates, 
and urgently in need of explanation! This explanation is fur- 
nished by another and earlier memory of my childhood. When 
I was six years old, and receiving my first lessons from my 
mother, I was expected to believe that we are made of dust, and 
must, therefore, return to dust. But this did not please me, and 
I questioned the doctrine. Thereupon my mother rubbed the 
palms of her hands together — just as in making dumplings, 
except that there was no dough between them — and showed me 
the blackish scales of epidermis which were thus rubbed off, as 
a proof that it is of dust that we are made. Great was my aston- 
ishment at this demonstration ad oculos, and I acquiesced in the 
idea which I was later to hear expressed in the words: “Thou 
owest nature a death .” 22 Thus the women to whom I go in the 
kitchen, as I so often did in my childhood when I was hungry 
and my mother, sitting by the fire, admonished me to wait until 
lunch was ready, are really the Parcae. And now for the dump- 
lings! At least one of my teachers at the University — the very 
one to whom I am indebted for my histological knowledge {epi- 
dermis ) — would be reminded by the name Knodl {Knodl means 
dumpling), of a person whom he had to prosecute for plagiaris- 
ing his writings. Committing a plagiarism, taking anything one 

22 Both the affects pertaining to these childish scenes — astonishment and 
resignation to the inevitable — appeared in a dream of slightly earlier date, 
which first reminded me of this incident of my childhood. 


ro8 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

can lay hands on, even though it belongs to another, obviously 
leads to the second part of the dream, in which 1 am treated like 
the overcoat thief who for some time plied his trade in the 
lecture-halls. I have written the word plagiarism — without defi- 
nite intention — because it occurred to me, and now I see that it 
must belong to the latent dream-content and that it will serve 
as a bridge between the different parts of the manifest dream- 
content. The chain of associations — Pilagic — plagiarism — plagi- 
ostomi 23 (sharks) — fish-bladder — connects the old novel with 
the affair of Knodl and the overcoats (German: Uberzieker = 
pullover, overcoat or condom) , which obviously refer to an ap- 
pliance appertaining to the technique of sex. This, it is true, is 
a very forced and irrational connection, but it is nevertheless 
one which I could not have established in waking life if it had 
not already been established by the dream-work. Indeed, as 
though nothing were sacred to this impulse to enforce associa- 
tions, the beloved name, Briicke (bridge of words, see above), 
now serves to remind me of the very institute in which I spent 
my happiest hours as a student, wanting for nothing. “So will 
you at the breasts of Wisdom every day more pleasure find”) , 
in the most complete contrast to the desires which plague me 
(German: plagcn) while I dream. And finally, there emerges 
the recollection of another dear teacher, whose name once more 
sounds like something edible ( Fleischl — Fleisch = meat — like 
Knodl = dumplings), and of a pathetic scene in which the 
scales of epidermis play a part (mother — hostess), and mental 
derangement (the novel), and a remedy from the Latin phar- 
macopeia ( Kiiche — kitchen) which numbs the sensation of 
hunger, namely, cocaine. 

In this manner I could follow the intricate trains of thought 
still farther, and could fully elucidate that part of the dream 
which is lacking in the analysis; but I must refrain, because the 
personal sacrifice which this would involve is too great. I shall 
take up only one of the threads, which will serve to lead us di- 
rectly to one of the dream-thoughts that lie at the bottom of the 

28 1 do not bring in the plagiostomi arbitrarily; they recall a painful in- 
cident of disgrace before the same teacher. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OR DREAMS IO9 

medley. The stranger with the long face and pointed beard, who 
wants to prevent me from putting on the overcoat, has the fea- 
tures of a tradesman of Spalato, of whom my wife bought a 
great deal of Turkish cloth. His name was Popovic, a suspicious 
name, which even gave the humorist Stettenheim a pretext for 
a suggestive remark: “He told me his name, and blushingly 
shook my hand.”- 1 For the rest, I find the same misuse of names 
as above in the case of Pilagie, Knodl, Briicke, Fleischl. No one 
will deny that such playing with names is a childish trick; if I 
indulge in it the practice amounts to an act of retribution, for 
my own name has often enough been the subject of such feeble 
attempts at wit. Goethe once remarked how sensitive a man is 
in respect to his name, which he feels that he fills even as he fills 
his skin; Herder having written the following lines on his 
name: — 

“Der du von Gottern abstammst, von Gothen oder vom Kote.” 
“So seid ihr Gotterbilder auch zu Staub.” 

“Thou who art bom of the gods, of the Goths, or of the mud.” 
“Thus are thy godlike images even dust.” 

I realize that this digression on the misuse of names was intended 
merely to justify this complaint. But here let us stop. . . . The 
purchase at Spalato reminds me of another purchase at Cattaro, 
where I was too cautious, and missed the opportunity of making 
an excellent bargain. (Missing an opportunity at the breast of 
the wet-nurse; see above.) One of the dream-thoughts occa- 
sioned by the sensation of hunger really amounts to this: We 
should let nothing escape; we should take what we can get, even 
if we do a little wrong; we should never let an opportunity go 
by; life is so short, and death inevitable. Because this is meant 
even sexually, and because desire is unwilling to check itself 
before the thought of doing wrong, this philosophy of carpe diem 
has reason to fear the censorship, and must conceal itself behind 
a dream. And so all sorts of counter-thoughts find expression, 
with recollections of the time when spiritual nourishment alone 

a< Popo = backside, in German nursery language. 


IIO THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

was sufficient for the dreamer, with hindrances of every kind 
and even threats of disgusting sexual punishments. 

II. A second dream requires a longer preliminary statement: 

I had driven to the Western Station in order to start on a 
holiday trip to the Aussee, but I went on to the platform in time 
for the Ischl train, which leaves earlier. There I saw Count Thun, 
who was again going to see the Emperor at Ischl. In spite of the 
rain he arrived in an open carriage, caiue straight through the 
entrance-gate for the local trains, and with a curt gesture and 
not a word of explanation he waved back the gatekeeper, who 
did not know him and wanted to take his ticket. After he had 
left in the Ischl train, I was asked to leave the platform and 
return to the waiting-room; but after some difficulty I obtained 
permission to remain. I passed the time noting how many people 
bribed the officials to secure a compartment; I fully intended 
to make a complaint — that is, to demand the same privilege. 
Meanwhile I sang something to myself, which I afterwards rec- 
ognized as the aria from The Marriage of Figaro : — 

“If my lord Count would tread a measure, tread a measure, 
Let him but say his pleasure, 

And I will play the tune.” 

(Possibly another person would not have recognized the tune.) 

The whole evening I was in a high-spirited, pugnacious mood ; 
I chaffed the waiter and the cab-driver, I hope without hurting 
their feelings; and now all kinds of bold and revolutionary 
thought came into my mind, such as would fit themselves to the 
words of Figaro, and to memories of Beaumarchais’ comedy, of 
which I had seen a performance at the CombAie Frangaise. The 
speech about the great men who have taken the trouble to be 
born; the seigneurial right which Count Almaviva wishes to 
exercise with regard to Susanne; the jokes which our malicious 
Opposition journalists make on the name of Count Thun (Ger- 
man, thun = do) ; calling him Graf Nichtsthun, Count-Do- 
Nothing. I really do not envy him; he now has a difficult audi- 
ence with the Emperor before him, and it is I who am the real 
Count-Do-Nothing, for I am going off for a holiday. I make all 



Ill 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 

sorts of amusing plans for the vacation. Now a gentleman ar- 
rives whom I know as a Government representative at the med- 
ical examinations, and who has won the flattering nickname of 
“the Governmental bedfellow” (literally, “by-sleeper”) by his 
activities in this capacity. By insisting on his official status he 
secured half a first-class compartment, and I heard one guard 
say to another: “Where are we going to put the gentleman with 
the first-class half-compartment?” A pretty sort of favouritism! 
I am paying for a whole first-class compartment. I did actually 
get a whole compartment to myself, but not in a through car- 
riage, so there was no lavatory at my disposal during the night. 
My complaints to the guard were fruitless; I revenged myself 
by suggesting that at least a hole be made in the floor of this 
compartment, to serve the possible needs of passengers. At a 
quarter to three in the morning I wake, with an urgent desire to 
urinate, from the following dream: — 

A crowd, a students' meeting , . . , A certain Count (Thun or 
Taaffe) is making a speech . Being asked to say something about 
the Germans, he declares, with a contemptuous gesture, that 
their favourite flower is coltsfoot , and he then puts into his but- 
tonhole something like a torn leaf, really the crumpled skelton 
of a leaf . I jump up, and I jump up, 2 * but I am surprised at my 
implied attitude . Then, more indistinctly: It seems as though 
this were the vestibule (Aula); the exits are thronged, and one 
must escape . I make my way through a suite of handsomely 
appointed rooms , evidently ministerial apartments, with furni- 
ture of a colour between brown and violet, and at last I come to 
a corridor in which a housekeeper, a fat, elderly woman, is 
seated . I try to avoid speaking to her, but she apparently thinks 
I have a right to pass this way, because she asks whether she 
shall accompany me with the lamp. I indicate with a gesture, or 
tell her, that she is to remain standing on the stairs, and it seems 
to me that I am very clever, for after all I am evading detection. 
Now I am downstairs, and I find a narrow , steeply rising path, 
which I follow. 

26 This repetition has crept into the text of the dream, apparently through 
absent-mindedness, and I have left it because analysis shows that it has a 
meaning. 



1 12 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

Again indistinctly: It is as though my second task ^cro to get 
away from the city, just a: my first was to get out of the build- 
ing . I am riding in a one-horse cab, and I tell the driver to take 
me to a railway station . “I can’t drive with you on the railway 
line itself ” I say, when he reproaches me as though I had tired 
him out . Here it seems as though I had already made a journey 
in his cab which is usually made by rail The stations are 
crowded; I am wondering whether to go to Krcms or to Znaim, 
but 1 reflect that the Court will be there, and I decide in favour 
of Graz or some such place. Now I am seated in the railway car- 
riage , which is rather like a tram, and I have in my buttonhole 
a peculiar long braided thing, on which are violet-brown violets 
of stiff material, which makes a great impression on people . Here 
the scene breaks off. 

I am once more in front of the railway station, but I am in 
the company of an elderly gentleman . I think out a scheme for 
remaining unrecognized, but I see this plan already being carried 
out. Thinking and experiencing are here, as it were, the same 
thing . He pretends to be blind, at least in one eye, and I hold 
before him a male glass urinal ( which we have to buy in the city , 
or have bought ). I am thus a sick-nurse, and have to give him 
the urinal because he is blind * If the conductor secs us in this 
position, he must pass us by without drawing attention to us. At 
the same time the position of the elderly man, and his urinating 
organ, is plastically perceived . Then I wake with a desire to 
urinate . 

The whole dream seems a sort of phantasy, which takes the 
dreamer back to the year of revolution, 1848, the memory of 
which had been revived by the jubilee of 1898, as well as by a 
little excursion to Wachau, on which I visited Emmersdorf, the 
refuge of the student leader Fischof, 26 to whom several features 
of the manifest dream-content might refer. The association of 
ideas then leads me to England, to the house of my brother, 
who used in jest to twit his wife with the title of Tennyson’s 
poem Fifty Years Ago, whereupon the children were used to 

30 This is an error and not a slip, for I learned later that the Emmersdorf in 
Wachau is not identical with the refuge of the revolutionist Fischof, a 
place of the same name. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF npyA-mro II3 

correct him: Fifteen Years Ago. This phantasy, however, which 
attaches itself to the thoughts evoked by the sight of Count 
Thun, is, like the facade of an Italian church, without organic 
connection with the structure behind it, but unlike such a facade 
it is full of gaps, and confused, and in many places portions of 
the interior break through. The first situation of the dream is 
made up of a number of scenes, into which I am able to dissect 
it. The arrogant attitude of the Count in the dream is copied 
from a scene at my school which occurred in my fifteenth year. 
We had hatched a conspiracy against an unpopular and ignorant 
teacher; the leading spirit in this conspiracy was a schoolmate 
who since that time seems to have taken Henry VIII of England 
as his model. It fell to me to carry out the coup d’itat, and a 
discussion of the importance of the Danube (German, Donau) 
to Austria (Wachau!) was the occasion of an open revolt. One 
of our fellow-conspirators was our only aristocratic schoolmate 
— he was called “the giraffe” on account of his conspicuous 
height — and while he was being reprimanded by the tyrant of 
the school, the professor of the German language, he stood just 
as the Count stood in the dream. The explanation of the favourite 
flower, and the putting into a buttonhole of something that 
must have been a flower (which recalls the orchids which I had 
given that day to a friend, and also a rose of Jericho) prom- 
inently recalls the incident in Shakespeare’s historical play which 
opens the civil wars of the Red and the White Roses; the men- 
tion of Henry VIII has paved the way to this reminiscence. Now 
it is not very far from roses to red and white carnations. (Mean- 
while two little rhymes, the one German, the other Spanish, 
insinuate themselves into the analysis: Rosen, Tulpen, Nelken, 
alle Blumen welken, and Isabelita, no llores, que se marchitan 
las flores. The Spanish line occurs in Figaro.) Here in Vienna 
white carnations have become the badge of the Anti-Semites, 
red ones of the Social Democrats. Behind this is the recollection 
of an anti-Semitic challenge during a railway journey in beau- 
tiful Saxony (Anglo-Saxon). The third scene contributing to 
the formation of the first situation in the dream dates from my 
early student days. There was a debate in a German students’ 
dub about the relation of philosophy to the general sciences. 


1 14 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

Being a green youth, full of materialistic doctrines, I thrust my- 
self forward in order to defend an extremely one-sided position. 
Thereupon a sagacious older fellow-student, who has since then 
shown his capacity for leading men and organizing the masses, 
and who, moreover, bears a name belonging to the animal king- 
dom, rose and gave us a thorough dressing-down; he too, he 
said, had herded swine in his youth, and had then returned 
repentant to his father’s house. I jumped up (as in the dream), 
became piggishly rude, and retorted that since I knew he had 
herded swine, I was not surprised at the tone of his discourse. 
(In the dream I am surprised at my German Nationalistic feel- 
ings.) There was a great commotion, and an almost general 
demand that I should retract my words, but I stood my ground. 
The insulted student was too sensible to take the advice which 
was offered him, that he should send me a challenge, and let the 
matter drop. 

The remaining elements of this scene of the dream are of more 
remote origin. What does it mean that the Count should make 
a scornful reference to coltsfoot? Here I must question my train 
of associations. Coltsfoot (German: Huflattich), Lattice (let- 
tuce) , Salathund (the dog that grudges others what he cannot 
eat himself). Here plenty of approbrious epithets may be dis- 
cerned: Gir-affe (German: Affe = monkey, ape) , pig, sow, dog; 
I might even arrive, by way of the name, at donkey, and thereby 
pour contempt upon an academic professor. Furthermore, I 
translate coltsfoot (Huflattich) — I do not know whether I do 
so correctly — by pisse-en-lit. I get this idea from Zola’s Ger- 
minal, in which some children are told to bring some dandelion 
salad with them. The dog — ckien — has a name sounding not 
unlike the verb for the major function (chier, as pisser stands for 
the minor one). Now we shall soon have the indecent in all its 
three physical categories, for in the same Germinal, which deals 
with the future revolution, there is a description of a very 
peculiar contest, which relates to the production of the gaseous 
excretions known as flatus . 27 And now I cannot but observe how 

27 Not in Germinal, but in La Terre— a. mistake of which I became aware 
only in the analysis.— Here I would call attention to the identity of letters 
in Huflattich and Flatus. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 11$ 

the way to this flatus has been prepared a long while since, be- 
ginning with the flowers, and proceeding to the Spanish rhyme 
of Isabelita, to Ferdinand and Isabella, and, by way of Henry 
VIII, to English history at the time of the Armada, after the 
victorious termination of which the English struck a medal with 
the inscription: Flavit et dissipati sunt, for the storm had scat- 
tered the Spanish fleet. 28 1 had thought of using this phrase, half 
jestingly, as the title of a chapter on “Therapy,” if I should 
ever succeed in giving a detailed account of my conception and 
treatment of hysteria. 

I cannot give so detailed an interpretation of the second scene 
of the dream, out of sheer regard for the censorship. For at this 
point I put myself in the place of a certain eminent gentleman 
of the revolutionary period, who had an adventure with an eagle 
(German: Adler) and who is said to have suffered from incon- 
tinence of the bowels, incontinentia aim, etc.; and here I believe 
that I should not be justified in passing the censorship, even 
though it was an aulic councillor (aula, consiliarius aulicus) 
who told me the greater part of this history. The suit of rooms 
in the dream is suggested by his Excellency’s private saloon car- 
riage, into which I was able to glance; but it means, as it so 
often does in dreams, a woman (Frauenzimmer, German, Zim- 
mer — room, is appended to Frauen — woman, in order to imply 
a slight contempt 20 ). The personality of the housekeeper is an 
ungrateful allusion to a witty old lady, which ill repays her for 
the good times and the many good stories which I have enjoyed 
in her house. The incident of the lamp goes back to Grillparzer, 
who notes a cha rmi ng experience of a similar nature, of which he 
afterwards made use in Eero and Leander (the waves of the sea 
and of love — the Armada and the storm ) . 

I must forego a detailed analysis of the two remaining por- 
tions of the dream; I shall single out only those elements which 
lead me back to the two scenes of my childhood for the sake of 

as An unsolicited biographer, Dr. F. Wittels, reproaches me for havmg 
omitted the name of Jehovah from the above motto. The English medal 
contains the name of the Deity, in Hebrew letters, on the background of a 
cloud, and placed in such a manner that one may equally well regard it as 
part of the picture or as part of the inscription. 

28 [Translator’s Note.] 



Il6 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

which alone I have selected the dream. The reader will rightly 
assume that it is sexual material which necessitates the suppres- 
sion; but he may not be content with this explanation. There 
are many things of which one makes no secret to oneself, but 
which must be treated as secrets in addressing others, and here 
we are concerned not with the reasons which induce me to con- 
ceal the solution, but with the motive of the inner censorship 
which conceals the real content of the dream even from myself. 
Concerning this, I will confess that the analysis reveals these 
three portions of the dream as impertinent boasting, the exuber- 
ance of an absurd megalomania, long ago suppressed in my wak- 
ing life, which, however, dares to show itself, with individual 
ramifications, even in the manifest dream-content (it seem to 
me that 1 am a cunning fellow) , making the high-spirited mood 
of the evening before the dream perfectly intelligible. Boasting 
of every kind, indeed; thus, the mention of Graz points to the 
phrase: “What price Graz?” which one is wont to use when one 
feels unusually wealthy. Readers who recall Master Rabelais’s 
inimitable description of the life and deeds of Gargantua and 
his son Pantagruel will be able to enroll even the suggested con- 
tent of the first portion of the dream among the boasts to which 
I have alluded. But the following belongs to the two scenes of 
childhood of which I have spoken: I had bought a new trunk 
for this journey, the colour of which, a brownish violet , appears 
in the dream several times (violet-brown violets of a stiff cloth, 
on an object which is known as a “girl-catcher” — the furniture 
in the ministerial chambers). Children, we know, believe that 
one attracts people’s attention with anything new. Now I have 
been told of the following incident of my childhood; my recol- 
lection of the occurrence itself has been replaced by my recollec- 
tion of the story. I am told that at the age of two I still used 
occasionally to wet my bed, and that when I was reproved for 
doing so I consoled my father by promising to buy him a beau- 
tiful new red bed in N. (the nearest large town). Hence, the 
interpolation in the dream, that we had bought the urinal in the 
city or had to buy it; one must keep one’s promises. (One should 
note, moreover, the association of the male urinal and the 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 117 

woman’s trunk, box.) All the megalomania of the child is con- 
tained in this promise. The significance of dreams of urinary 
difficulties in the case of children has already been considered in 
the interpretation of an earlier dream (cf . the dream on p. 73 ff.) . 
The psychoanalysis of neurotics has taught us to recog niz e the 
intimate connection between wetting the bed and the character 
trait of ambition. 

Then, when I was seven or eight years of age another domestic 
incident occurred which I remember very well. One evening, be- 
fore going to bed, I had disregarded the dictates of discretion, 
and had satisfied my needs in my parents’ bedroom, and in their 
presence. Reprimanding me for this delinquency, my father re- 
marked: “That boy will never amount to anything.” This must 
have been a terrible affront to my ambition, for allusions to this 
scene recur again and again in my dreams, and are constantly 
coupled with enumerations of my accomplishments and suc- 
cesses, as though I wanted to say: “You see, I have amounted to 
something after all.” This childish scene furnishes the elements 
for the last image of the dream, in which the roles are inter- 
changed, of course for the purpose of revenge. The elderly man, 
obviously my father, for the blindness in one eye signifies his 
one-sided glaucoma, 80 is now urinating before me as I once uri- 
nated before him. By means of the glaucoma I remind my father 
of cocaine, which stood him in good stead during his operation, 
as though I had thereby fulfilled my promise. Besides, I make 
sport of him; since he is blind, I must hold the glass in front of 
him, and I delight in allusions to my knowledge of the theory of 
hysteria, of which I am proud. 81 

30 Another interpretation; He is one-eyed like Odin, the father of the gods 
— Odin’s consolation. The consolation in the childish scene; I will buy him 
a new bed. 

81 Here is some more material for interpretation; Holding the urine-glass 
recalls the story of a peasant (illiterate) at the optician’s, who tried on now 
one pair of spectacles, now another, but was still unable to read. — (Peasant- 
catcher — girl-catcher in the preceding portion of the dream.) — The peas- 
ants’ treatment of the feeble-minded father in Zola’s La Terre.— The tragic 
atonement, that in his last days my father soiled his bed like a child; hence, 
I am his nurse in the dream. — “Thinking and experiencing are here, as it 
were, identical ” ; this recalls a highly revolutionary closet drama by Oscar 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


nS 

If the two childish scenes of urination are, according to my 
theory, closely associated with the desire for greatness, their 
resuscitation on the journey to the Aussee was further favoured 
by the accidental circumstance that my compartment had no 
lavatory, and that I must be prepared to postpone relief during 
the journey, as actually happened in the morning when I woke 
with the sensation of a bodily need* I suppose one might be in- 
clined to credit this sensation with being the actual stimulus of 
the clream; I should, however, prefer a different explanation, 
namely, that the dream-thoughts first gave rise to the desire to 
urinate. It is quite unusual for me to be disturbed in sleep by any 

Panizza, in which God, the Father, is ignominously treated as a palsied 
greybeard. With Him will and deed are one, and in the book he has to be 
restrained by His archangel, a sort of Ganymede, from scolding and swear- 
ing, because His curses would immediately be fulfilled.— Making plans is a 
reproach against my father, dating from a later period in the development 
of the critical faculty, much as the whole rebellious content of the dream, 
which commits Use majesU and scorns authority, may be traced to a revolt 
against my father. The sovereign is called the father of his country 
(Landesvatcr ) , and the father is the first and oldest, and for the child the 
only authority, from whose absolutism the other social authorities have 
evolved in the course of the history of human civilization (in so far as 
“mother-right” does not necessitate a qualification of this doctrine). — 
The words which occurred to me in the dream, “thinking and experiencing 
are the same thing,” refer to the explanation of hysterical symptoms, with 
which the male urinal (glass) is also associated. — I need not explain the 
principle of Gschnas to a Viennese; it consists in constructing objects of 
rare and costly appearance out of trivial, and preferably comical and worth- 
less material— for example, making suits of armour out of kitchen utensils, 
wisps of straw and Scdzstangeln (long rolls) , as our artists arc fond of doing 
at their jolly parties. I had learned that hysterical subjects do the same 
thing; besides what really happens to them, they unconsciously conceive 
for themselves horrible or extravagantly fantastic incidents, which they 
build up out of the most harmless and commonplace material of actual ex- 
perience. The symptoms attach themselves primarily to these phantasies, 
not to the memory of real events, whether serious or trivial. This explana- 
tion had helped me to overcome many difficulties, and afforded me much 
pleasure. I was able to allude to it by means of the dream-element “male 
urine-glass,” because I had been told that at the last Gschnas evening a 
poison-chalice of Lucretia Borgia’s had been exhibited, the chief constitu- 
ent of which had consisted of a glass urinal for men, such as is used in 
hospitals. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS IIQ 

physical need, least of all at the time when I woke on this occa- 
sion — a quarter to three in the morning. I would forestall a 
further objection by remarking that I have hardly ever felt a 
desire to urinate after waking early on other journeys made 
under more comfortable circumstances. However, I can leave 
this point undecided without weakening my argument. 

Further, since experience in dream-analysis has drawn my 
attention to the fact that even from dreams the interpretation of 
which seems at first sight complete, because the dream-sources 
and the wish-stimuli are easily demonstrable, important trains 
of thought proceed which reach back into the earliest years of 
childhood, I had to ask myself whether this characteristic does 
not even constitute an essential condition of dreaming. If it were 
permissible to generalize this notion, I should say that every 
dream is connected through its manifest content with recent ex- 
periences, while through its latent content it is connected with 
the most remote experiences; and I can actually show in the 
analysis of hysteria that these remote experiences have in a very 
real sense remained recent right up to the present. But I still find 
it very difficult to prove this conjecture; I shall have to return 
to the probable r 61 e in dream-formation of the earliest expe- 
riences of our childhood in another connection (Chapter VII). 

Of the three peculiarities of the dream-memory considered 
above, one — the preference for the unimportant in the dream- 
content — has been satisfactorily explained by tracing it back to 
dream-distortion. We have succeeded in establishing the exist- 
ence of the other two peculiarities — the preferential selection of 
recent and also of infantile material — but we have found it im- 
possible to derive them from the motives of the dream. Let us 
keep in mind these two characteristics, which we still have to 
explain or evaluate; a place will have to be found for them else- 
where, either in the discussion of the psychology of the sleeping 
state, or in the consideration of the structure of the psychic 
apparatus— which we shall undertake later after we have seen 
that by means of dream-interpretation we are able to glance as 
through an inspection-hole into the interior of this apparatus. 

But here and now I will emphasize another result of the last 



120 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

few dream-analyses. The dream often appears to have several 
meanings; not only may several wish-fulfilments be combined 
in it, as our examples show, but one meaning or one wish-fulfil- 
ment may conceal another, until in the lowest stratum one comes 
upon the fulfilment of a wish from the earliest period of child- 
hood; and here again it may be questioned whether the word 
“often” at the beginning of this sentence may not more correctly 
be replaced by “constantly .” 32 

C. THE SOMATIC SOURCES OF DREAMS 

If we attempt to interest a cultured layman in the problems of 
dreams, and if, with this end in view, we ask him what he believes 
to be the source of dreams, we shall generally find that he feels 
quite sure he knows at least this part of the solution. He thinks 
immediately of the influence exercised on the formation of 
dreams by a disturbed or impeded digestion (“Dreams come 
from the stomach”), an accidental position of the body, a trifling 
occurrence during sleep. He does not seem to suspect that even 
after all these factors have been duly considered something still 
remains to be explained. 

In the introductory chapter 33 we examined at length the 
opinion of scientific writers on the role of somatic stimuli in the 
formation of dreams, so that here we need only recall the results 
of this inquiry. We have seen that three kinds of somatic stimuli 
will be distinguished: the objective sensory stimuli which pro- 
ceed from external objects, the inner states of excitation of the 
sensory organs, having only a subjective reality, and the bodily 

sa The stratification of the meanings of dreams is one of the most delicate 
but also one of the most fruitful problems of dream-interpretation. Who- 
ever forgets the possibility of such stratification is likely to go astray and to 
make untenable assertions concerning the nature of dreams. But hitherto 
this subject has been only too imperfectly investigated. So far, a fairly 
orderly stratification of symbols in dreams due to urinary stimulus has been 
subjected to a thorough evaluation only by Otto Rank. 

38 This part has been omitted from this text. Those who have a special 
interest in the subject may read the original translation published by Mac- 
millan Co., N. Y. and Allen & Unwin, London. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OR DREAMS 12 1 

stimuli arising within the body; and we have also noticed that 
the writers on dreams are inclined to thrust into the background 
any psychic sources of dreams which may operate simultaneously 
with the somatic stimuli, or to exclude them altogether. In testing 
the claims made on behalf of these somatic stimuli we have learned 
that the significance of the objective excitation of the sensory 
organs — whether accidental stimuli operating during sleep, or 
such as cannot be excluded from the dormant relation of these 
dream-images and ideas to the internal bodily stimuli and con- 
firmed by experiment; that the part played by the subjective 
sensory stimuli appears to be demonstrated by the recurrence of 
hypnagogic sensory images in dreams; and that, although the 
broadly accepted relation of these dream-images and ideas to 
the internal bodily stimuli cannot be exhaustively demonstrated, 
it is at all events confirmed by the well-known influence which 
an excited state of the digestive, urinary and sexual organs exer- 
cises upon the content of our dreams. 

“Nerve stimulus” and “bodily stimulus” would thus be the 
anatomical sources of dreams; that is, according to many writers, 
the sole and exclusive sources of dreams. 

But we have already considered a number of doubtful points, 
which seem to question not so much the correctness of the 
somatic theory as its adequacy. 

However confident the representatives of this theory may be 
of its factual basis — especially in respect of the accidental and 
external nerve-stimuli, which may without difficulty be recog- 
nized in the dream-content — nevertheless they have all come 
near to admitting that the rich content of ideas found in dreams 
cannot be derived from the external nerve-stimuli alone. In this 
connection Miss Mary Whiton Calkins tested her own dreams, 
and those of a second person, for a period of six weeks, and found 
that the element of external sensory perception was demon- 
strable in only 13.2 per cent, and 6.7 per cent, of these dreams 
respectively. Only two dreams in the whole collection could be 
referred to organic sensations. These statistics confirm what a 
cursory survey of our own experience would already have led us 
to suspect. 



122 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

A distinction has often been made between “nerve-stimulus 
dreams” which have already been thoroughly investigated, and 
other forms of dreams. Spitta, for example, divided dreams into 
nerve-stimulus dreams and association-dreams. But it was obvi- 
ous that this solution remained unsatisfactory unless the link 
between the somatic sources of dreams and their ideational con- 
tent could be indicated. 

In addition to the first objection, that of the insufficient fre- 
quency of the extern;i] sources of stimulus, a second objection 
presents itself, namely, the inadequacy of the explanations of 
dreams afforded by this category of dream-sources. There are 
two things which the representatives of this theory have failed 
to explain: firstly, why the true nature of the external stimulus 
is not recognized in die dream, but is constantly mistaken for 
something else; and secondly, why the result of the reaction of 
the perceiving mind to this misconceived stimulus should be so 
indeterminate and variable. We have seen that Striimpell, in 
answer to these questions, asserts that the mind, since it turns 
away from the outer world during sleep, is not in a position to 
give the correct interpretation of the objective sensory stimulus, 
but is forced to construct illusions on the basis of the indefinite 
stimulation arriving from many directions. In his own words 
(Die Natur md Entstchmg dcr Traume, p. 108) : 

“When by an external or internal nerve-stimulus during sleep 
a feeling, or a complex of feelings, or any sort of psychic process 
arises in the mind, and is perceived by the mind, this process 
calls up from the mind perceptual images belonging to the 
sphere of the waking experiences, that is to say, earlier percep- 
tions, either unembellished, or with the psychic values apper- 
taining to them. It collects about itself, as it were, a greater or 
lesser number of such images, from which the impression result- 
ing from the nerve-stimulus receives its psychic value. In this 
connection it is commonly said, as in ordinary language we say 
of the waking procedure, that the mind interprets in sleep the 
impressions of nervous stimuli. The result of this interpretation 
is the so-called nerve-stimulus dream — that is, a dream the com- 
ponents of which are conditioned by the fact that a nerve-stimu- 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS I23 

lus produces its psychical effect in the life of the mind in accord- 
ance with the laws of reproduction.” 

In all essential points identical with this doctrine is Wundt’s 
statement that the concepts of dreams proceed, at all events for 
the most part, from sensory stimuli, and especially from the 
stimuli of general sensation, and are therefore mostly phantastic 
illusions — probably only to a small extent pure memory -concep- 
tions raised to the condition of hallucinations. To illustrate the 
relation between dream-content and dream-stimuli which follows 
from this theory, Striimpell makes use of an excellent simile. It 
is “as though the ten fingers of a person ignorant of music were 
to stray over the keyboard of an instrument.” The implication is 
that the dream is not a psychic phenomenon, originating from 
psychic motives, but the result of a physiological stimulus, 
which expresses itself in psychic symptomatology because the 
apparatus affected by the stimulus is not capable of any other 
mode of expression. Upon a similar assumption is based the ex- 
planation of obsessions which Meynert attempted in his famous 
simile of the dial on which individual figures are most deeply 
embossed. 

Popular though this theory of the somatic dream-stimuli has 
become, and seductive though it may seem, it is none the less 
easy to detect its weak point. Every somatic dream-stimulus 
which provokes the psychic apparatus in sleep to interpretation 
by the formation of illusions may evoke an incalculable number 
of such attempts at interpretation. It may consequently be rep- 
resented in the dream-content by an extraordinary number of 
different concepts . 34 But the theory of Striimpell and Wundt can- 
not point to any sort of motive which controls the relation be- 
tween the external stimulus and the dream-concept chosen to 
interpret it, and therefore it cannot explain the “peculiar choice” 
which the stimuli “often enough make in the course of their 
productive activity” (Lipps, Grundtatsachen des Seelenlebens x 

34 1 would advise everyone to read the exact and detailed records (collected 
in two volumes) of the dreams experimentally produced by Mourly Void 
in order to convince himself how little the conditions of the experiments 
help to explain the content of the individual dream, and how little such ex- 
periments help us towards an understanding of the problems of dreams. 


124 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

p. 170). Other objections may be raised against the fundamental 
assumption behind the theory of illusions — the assumption that 
during sleep the mind is not in a condition to recognize the real 
nature of the objective sensory stimuli. The old physiologist 
Burdach shows us that the mind is quite capable even during 
sleep of a correct interpretation of the sensory impressions which 
reach it, and of reacting in accordance with this correct interpre- 
tation, inasmuch as he demonstrates that certain sensory im- 
pressions which seem important to the individual may be ex- 
cepted from the general neglect of the sleeping mind (as in 
the example of nurse and child), and that one is more surely 
awakened by one’s own name than by an indifferent auditory 
impression; all of which presupposes, of course, that the mind 
discriminates between sensations, even in sleep. Burdach infers 
from these observations that we must not assume that the mind 
is incapable of interpreting sensory stimuli in the sleeping state, 
but rather that it is not sufficiently interested in them. The argu- 
ments which Burdach employed in 1830 reappear unchanged in 
the works of Lipps (in the year 1883), where they are employed 
for the purpose of attacking the theory of somatic stimuli. Ac- 
cording to these arguments the mind seems to be like the sleeper 
in the anecdote, who, on being asked, “Are you asleep?” answers 
“No,” and on being again addressed with the words: “Then lend 
me ten florins,” takes refuge in the excuse: “I am asleep.” 

The inadequacy of the theory of somatic dream-stimuli may 
be further demonstrated in another way. Observation shows that 
external stimuli do not oblige me to dream, even though these 
stimuli appear in the dream-content as soon as I begin to dream 
— supposing that I do dream. In response to a touch- or pressure- 
stimulus experienced while I am asleep, a variety of reactions 
are at my disposal. I may overlook it, and find on waking that 
my leg has become uncovered, or that I have been lying on an 
arm; indeed, pathology offers me a host of examples of power- 
fully exciting sensory and motor stimuli of different kinds which 
remain ineffective during sleep, I may perceive the sensation 
during sleep, and through my sleep, as it were, as constantly 
happens in the case of pain stimuli, but without weaving the pain 
into the texture of a dream. And thirdly, I may wake up in 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 12 $ 

response to the stimulus, simply in order to avoid it. Still another, 
fourth, reaction is possible: namely, that the nerve-stimulus 
may cause me to dream; but the other possible reactions occur 
quite as frequently as the reaction of dream-formation. This, 
however, would not be the case if the incentive to dreaming did 
not lie outside the somatic dream-sources. 

Appreciating the importance of the above-mentioned lacunae 
in the explanation of dreams by somatic stimuli, other writers — 
Schemer, for example, and, following him, the philosopher Vol- 
kelt — endeavoured to determine more precisely the nature of 
the psychic activities which cause the many-coloured images of 
our dreams to proceed from the somatic stimuli, and in so doing 
they approached the problem of the essential nature of dreams 
as a problem of psychology, and regarded dreaming as a psychic 
activity. Schemer not only gave a poetical, vivid and glowing 
description of the psychic peculiarities which unfold themselves 
in the course of dream-formation, but he also believed that he 
had hit upon the principle of the method the mind employs in 
dealing with the stimuli which are offered to it. The dream, ac- 
cording to Schemer, in the free activity of the phantasy, which 
has been released from the shackles imposed upon it during the 
day, strives to represent symbolically the nature of the organ 
from which the stimulus proceeds. Thus there exists a sort of 
dream-book, a guide to the interpretation of dreams, by means 
of which bodily sensations, the conditions of the organs, and 
states of stimulation, may be inferred from the dream-images. 
“Thus the image of a cat expressed extreme ill-temper, the 
image of pale, smooth pastry the nudity of the body. The human 
body as a whole is pictured by the phantasy of the dream as a 
house, and the individual organs of the body as parts of the 
house. In ‘toothache-dreams’ a vaulted vestibule corresponds to 
the mouth, and a staircase to the descent from the pharynx to 
the oesophagus; in the ‘headache-dream’ a ceiling covered with 
disgusting toad-like spiders is chosen to denote the upper part 
of the head.” “Many different symbols are employed by our 
dreams for the same organ: thus the breathing lung finds its 
symbol in a roaring stove, filled with flames, the heart in empty 
boxes and baskets, and the bladder in round, bag-shaped or 


126 


THE INTERPRETATION OR DREAMS 


merely hollow objects. It is of particular significance that at the 
dose of the dream the stimulating organ or its function is often 
represented without disguise, and usually on the dreamer’s own 
body. Thus the ‘toothache-dream’ commonly ends by the dreamer 
drawing a tooth out of his mouth.” It cannot be said that 
this theory of dream-interpretation has found much favour with 
other writers. It seems, above all, extravagant; and so Schemer’s 
readers have hesistated to give it even the small amount of credit 
to which it is, in my opinion, entitled. As will be seen, it tends to 
a revival of dream-interpretation by means of symbolism, a 
method employed by the ancients; only the province from which 
the interpretation is to be derived is restricted to the human 
body. The lack of a scientifically comprehensible technique of 
interpretation must seriously limit the applicability of Schemer’s 
theory. Arbitrariness in the interpretation of dreams would ap- 
pear to be by no means excluded, especially since in this case 
also a stimulus may be expressed in the dream-contcnt by several 
representative symbols; thus even Schemer’s follower Volkelt 
was unable to confirm the representation of the body as a house. 
Another objection is that here again the dream-activity is re- 
garded as a useless and aimless activity of the mind, since, ac- 
cording to this theory, the mind is content with merely forming 
phantasies around the stimulus with which it is dealing, without 
even remotely attempting to abolish the stimulus. 

Schemer’s theory of the symbolization of bodily stimuli by 
the dream is seriously damaged by yet another objection. These 
bodily stimuli are present at all times, and it is generally assumed 
that the mind is more accessible to them during sleep than in the 
waking state. It is therefore impossible to understand why the 
mind does not dream continuously all night long, and why it does 
not dream every night about all the organs. If one attempts to 
evade this objection by positing the condition that special exci- 
tations must proceed from the eye, the ear, the teeth, the bowels, 
etc., in order to arouse the dream-activity, one is confronted 
with the difficulty of proving that this increase of stimulation is 
objective; and proof is possible only in a very few cases. If the 
dream of flying is a symbolization of the upward and downward 
motion of the pulmonary lobes, either this dream, as has already 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 12 7 

been remarked by Striimpell, should be dreamt much oftener, 
or it should be possible to show that respiration is more active 
during this dream. Yet a third alternative is possible — and it is 
the most probable of all — namely, that now and again special 
motives are operative to direct the attention to the visceral sen- 
sations which are constantly present. But this would take us 
far beyond the scope of Schemer’s theory. 

The value of Schemer’s and Volkelt’s disquisitions resides in 
their calling our attention to a number of characteristics of the 
dream-content which are in need of explanation, and which seem 
to promise fresh discoveries. It is quite true that symbolizations 
of the bodily organs and functions do occur in dreams: for ex- 
ample, that water in a dream often signifies a desire to urinate, 
that the male genital organ may be represented by an upright 
staff, or a pillar, etc. With dreams which exhibit a very animated 
field of vision and brilliant colours, in contrast to the dimness of 
other dreams, the interpretation that they are “dreams due to 
visual stimulation” can hardly be dismissed, nor can we dispute 
the participation of illusion-formation in dreams which contain 
noise and a medley of voices. A dream like that of Schemer’s, 
that two rows of fair handsome boys stood facing one another 
on a bridge, attacking one another, and then resuming their posi- 
tions, until finally the dreamer himself sat down on a bridge and 
drew a long tooth from his jaw; or a similar dream of Volkelt’s, 
in which two rows of drawers played a part, and which again 
ended in the extraction of a tooth; dream-formations of this kind, 
of which both writers relate a great number, forbid our dismiss- 
ing Schemer’s theory as an idle invention without seeking the 
kernel of truth which may be contained in it. We are therefore 
confronted with the task of finding a different explanation of the 
supposed symbolization of the alleged dental stimulus. 

Throughout our consideration of the theory of the somatic 
sources of dreams, I have refrained from urging the argument 
which arises from our analyses of dreams. If by a procedure 
which has not been followed by other writers in their investiga- 
tion of dreams we can prove that the dream possesses intrinsic 
value as psychic action, that a wish supplies the motive of its 
formation, and that the experiences of the previous day furnish 


128 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


the most obvious material of its content, any other theory of 
dreams which neglects such an important method of investiga- 
tion — and accordingly makes the dream appear a useless and 
enigmatical psychic reaction to somatic stimuli — may be dis- 
missed without special criticism. For in this case there would 
have to be— and this is highly improbable — two entirely different 
kinds of dreams, of which only one kind has come under our 
observation, while the other kind alone has been observed by 
the earlier investigators. It only remains now to find a place in 
our theory of dreams for the facts on which the current doctrine 
of somatic dream-stimuli is based. 

We have already taken the first step in this direction in ad- 
vancing the thesis that the dream-work is under a compulsion to 
elaborate into a unified whole all the dream-stimuli which are 
simultaneously present (p. 83). We have seen that when two 
or more experiences capable of making an impression on the 
mind have been left over from the previous day, the wishes that 
result from them are united into one dream; similarly, that the 
impressions possessing psychic value and the indifferent expe- 
riences of the previous day unite in the dream-material, provided 
that connecting ideas between the two can be established. Thus 
the dream appears to be a reaction to everything which is simul- 
taneously present as actual in the sleeping mind. As far as we 
have hitherto analysed the dream-material, we have discovered 
it to be a collection of psychic remnants and memory-traces, 
which we were obliged to credit (on account of the preference 
shown for recent and for infantile material) with a character of 
psychological actuality, though the nature of this actuality was 
not at the time determinable. We shall now have little difficulty 
in predicting what will happen when to these actualities of the 
memory fresh material in the form of sensations is added during 
sleep. These stimuli, again, are of importance to the dre am be- 
cause they are actual; they are united with the other psychic 
actualities to provide the material for dream-formation. To 
express it in other words, the stimuli which occur during sleep 
are elaborated into a wish-fulfilment, of which the other com- 
ponents are the psychic remnants of daily experience with which 
we are already familiar. This combination, however, is not in- 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 12 9 

evitable; we have seen that more than one kind of behaviour 
toward the physical stimuli received during sleep is possible. 
Where this combination is effected, a conceptual material for 
the dream-content has been found which will represent both 
kinds of dream-sources, the somatic as well as the psychic. 

The nature of the dream is not altered when somatic material 
is added to the psychic dream-sources; it still remains a wish- 
fulfilment, no matter how its expression is determined by the 
actual material available. 

I should like to find room here for a number of peculiarities 
which are able to modify the significance of external stimuli for 
the dream. I imagine that a co-operation of individual, physio- 
logical and accidental factors, which depend on the circum- 
stances of the moment, determines how one will behave in indi- 
vidual cases of more intensive objective stimulation during 
sleep; habitual or accidental profundity of sleep, in conjunction 
with the intensity of the stimulus, will in one case make it pos- 
sible so to suppress the stimulus that it will not disturb the 
sleeper, while in another case it will force the sleeper to wake, 
or will assist the attempt to subdue the stimulus by weaving it 
into the texture of the dream. In accordance with the multiplicity 
of these constellations, external objective stimuli will be ex- 
pressed more rarely or more frequently in the case of one person 
than in that of another. In my own case, since I am an excellent 
sleeper, and obstinately refuse to allow myself to be disturbed 
during sleep on any pretext whatever, this intrusion of external 
causes of excitation into my dreams is very rare, whereas psychic 
motives apparently cause me to dream very easily. Indeed, I 
have noted only a single dream in which an objective, painful 
source of stimulation is demonstrable, and it will be highly in- 
structive to see what effect the external stimulus had in this 
particular dream. 

I am riding a gray horse , at first timidly and awkwardly , as 
though I were merely carried along. Then I meet a colleague, P,, 
also on horseback , and dressed in rough frieze ; he is sitting erect 
in the saddle; he calls my attention to something (probably to 
the fact that I have a very bad seat). Now I begin to feel more 
and more at ease on the back of my highly intelligent horse ; / 



130 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

sit more comfortably, and I find that I am quite at home up 
here . My saddle is a sort of pad, which completely fills the space 
between the neck and the rump of the horse. I ride between two 
vans, and just manage to clear them. After riding up the street 
for some distance, I turn round and wish to dismount, at first in 
front of a little open chapel which is built facing onto the street. 
Then Ido really dismount in front of a chapel which stands near 
the first one; the hotel is in the same street; I might let the horse 
go there by itself, but I prefer to lead it thither. It seems as 
though I should be ashamed to arrive there on horseback. In 
front of the hotel there stands a page-boy, who shows me a note 
of mine which has been found, and ridicules me on account of it. 
On the note is written, doubly underlined, “Eat nothing ” and 
then a second sentence (indistinct) : something like “Do not 
work”; at the same time a hazy idea that I am in a strange city, 
in which I do not work. 

It will not at once be apparent that this dream originated 
under the influence, or rather under the compulsion, of a pain- 
stimulus. The day before, however, I had suffered from boils, 
which made every movement a torture, and at last a boil had 
grown to the size of an apple at the root of the scrotum, and 
had caused me the most intolerable pains at every step; a fever- 
ish lassitude, lack of appetite, and the hard work which I had 
nevertheless done during the day, had conspired with the pain 
to upset me. I was not altogether in a condition to discharge my 
duties as a physician, but in view of the nature and the location 
of the malady, it was possible to imagine something else for 
which I was most of all unfit, namely riding. Now it is this very 
activity of riding into which I am plunged by the dream; it is 
the most energetic denial of the pain which imagination could 
conceive. As a matter of fact, I cannot ride; I do not dream of 
doing so; I never sat on a horse but once — and then without a 
saddle — and I did not like it. But in this dream I ride as though 
I had no boil on the perineum; or rather, I ride, just because I 
want to have none. To judge from the description, my saddle is 
the poultice which has enabled me to fall asleep. Probably, being 
thus comforted, I did not feel anything of my pain during the 
first few hours of my sleep. Then the painful sensations made 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OR DREAMS 13I 

themselves felt, and tried to wake me; whereupon the dream 
came and said to me, soothingly: “Go on sleeping, you are not 
going to wake! You have no boil, for you are riding on horse- 
back, and with a boil just there no one could ride!” And the 
dream was successful; the pain was stifled, and I went on 
sleeping. 

But the dream was not satisfied with “suggesting away” the 
boil by tenaciously holding fast to an idea incompatible with 
the malady (thus behaving like the hallucinatory insanity of a 
mother who has lost her child, or of a merchant who has lost his 
fortune) . In addition, the details of the sensation denied and of 
the image used to suppress it serve the dream also as a means to 
connect other material actually present in the mind with the 
situation in the dream, and to give this material representation. 
I am riding on a gray horse — the colour of the horse exactly 
corresponds with the pepper-and-salt suit in which I last saw 
my colleague P. in the country. I have been warned that highly 
seasoned food is the cause of boils, and in any case it is preferable 
as an etiological explanation to sugar, which might be thought 
of in connection with furunculosis. My friend P. likes to “ride 
the high horse” with me ever since he took my place in the treat- 
ment of a female patient, in whose case I had performed great 
feats ( Kunststucke : in the dream I sit the horse at first sideways, 
like a trick-rider, Kunstreiter) , but who really, like the horse in 
the story of the Sunday equestrian, led me wherever she wished. 
Thus the horse comes to be a symbolic representation of a lady 
patient (in the dream it is highly intelligent ). “I feel quite at 
home” refers to the position which I occupied in the patient’s 
household until I was replaced by my colleague P. “I thought 
you were safe in the saddle up there,” one of my few well-wishers 
among the eminent physicians of the city recently said to me, 
with reference to the same household. And it was a feat to prac- 
tise psychotherapy for eight to ten hours a day, while suffering 
such pain, but I know that I cannot continue my peculiarly 
strenuous work for any length of time without perfect physical 
health, and the dream is full of dismal allusions to the situation 
which would result if my illness continued (the note, such as 
neurasthenics carry and show to their doctors) : Do not work, 


132 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

do not eat. On further interpretation I see that the dream-activ- 
ity has succeeded in finding its way from the wish-situation of 
riding to some very early childish quarrels which must have oc- 
curred between myself and a nephew, who is a year older than 
I, and is now living in England. It has also taken up elements 
from my journeys in Italy ; the street in the dream is built up out 
of impressions of Verona and Siena. A still deeper interpretation 
leads to sexual dream-thoughts, and I recall what the dream-al- 
lusions to that beautiful country were supposed to mean in the 
dream of a female patient who had never been to Italy {to Italy, 
German: genltalien = Genitalien — genitals ) ; at the same time 
there are references to the house in which I preceded my friend 
P. as physician, and to the place where the boil is located. 

In another dream I was similarly successful in warding off a 
threatened disturbance of my sleep; this time the threat came 
from a sensory stimulus. It was only chance, however, that en- 
abled me to discover the connection between the dream and the 
accidental dream-stimulus, and in this way to understand the 
dream. One midsummer morning in a Tyrolese mountain resort I 
woke with the knowledge that I had dreamed: The Pope is dead. 
I was not able to interpret this short, non-visual dream. I could 
remember only one possible basis of the dream, namely, that 
shortly before this the newspapers had reported that His Holi- 
ness was slightly indisposed. But in the course of the morning 
my wife asked me: “Did you hear the dreadful tolling of the 
church bells this morning?” I had no idea that I had heard it, 
but now I understood my dream. It was the reaction of my need 
for sleep to the noise by which the pious Tyroleans were trying 
to wake me. I avenged myself on them by the conclusion which 
formed the content of my dream, and continued to sleep, without 
any further interest in the tolling of the bells. 

Among the dreams mentioned in the previous chapters there 
are several which might serve as examples of the elaboration of 
so-called nerve-stimuli. The dream of drinking in long draughts 
is such an example; here the somatic stimulus seems to be the 
sole source of the dream, and the wish arising from the sensation 
— thirst — the only motive for dreaming. We find much the same 
thing in other simple dreams, where the somatic stimulus is 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS I33 

able of itself to generate a wish. The dream of the sick woman 
who throws the cooling apparatus from her cheek at night is an 
instance of an unusual manner of reacting to a pain-stimulus 
with a wish-fulfilment; it seems as though the patient had tem- 
porarily succeeded in making herself analgesic, and accompanied 
this by ascribing her pains to a stranger. 

My dream of the three Parcae is obviously a hunger-dream, 
but it has contrived to shift the need for food right back to the 
child's longing for its mother's breast, and to use a harmless 
desire as a mask for a more serious one that cannot venture to 
express itself so openly. In the dream of Count Thun we were 
able to see by what paths an accidental physical need was 
brought into relation with the strongest, but also the most rig- 
orously repressed impulses of the psychic life. And when, as in 
the case reported by Gamier, the First Consul incorporates the 
sound of an exploding infernal machine into a dream of battle 
before it causes him to wake, the true purpose for which alone 
psychic activity concerns itself with sensations during sleep is 
revealed with unusual clarity. A young lawyer, who is full of 
his first great bankruptcy case, and falls asleep in the afternoon, 
behaves just as the great Napoleon did. He dreams of a certain 
G. Reich in Hussiatyn, whose acquaintance he has made in con- 
nection with the bankruptcy case, but Hussiatyn (German: 
kusten, to cough) forces itself upon his attention still further; he 
is obliged to wake, only to hear his wife — who is suffering from 
bronchial catarrh — violently coughing. 

Let us compare the dream of Napoleon I — who, incidentally, 
was an excellent sleeper — with that of the sleepy student, who 
was awakened by his landlady with the reminder that he had to 
go to the hospital, and who thereupon dreamt himself into a bed 
in the hospital, and then slept on, the underlying reasoning being 
as follows: If I am already in the hospital, I needn't get up to go 
there. This is obviously a convenience-dream; the sleeper frankly 
admits to himself his motive in dreaming; but he thereby reveals 
one of the secrets of dreaming in general. In a certain sense, all 
dreams are convenience-dreams ; they serve the purpose of con- 
tinuing to sleep instead of waking. The dream is the guardian of 
sleep, not its disturber . In another place we shall have occasion 



134 the interpretation of dreams 

to justify this conception in respect to the psychic factors that 
make for waking; but we can already demonstrate its applicabil- 
ity to the objective external stimuli. Either the mind does not 
concern itself at all with the causes of sensations during sleep, if 
it is able to carry this attitude through as against the intensity 
of the stimuli, and their significance, of which it is well aware; or 
it employs the dream to deny these stimuli; or, thirdly, if it is 
obliged to recognize the stimuli, it seeks that interpretation of 
them which will represent the actual sensation as a component of 
a desired situation which is compatible with sleep. The actual 
sensation is woven into the dream in order to deprive it of its 
reality. Napoleon is permitted to go on sleeping; it is only a 
dream-memory of the thunder of the guns at Arcole which is 
trying to disturb him. 36 

The wish to sleep , to which the conscious ego has adjusted 
itself, and which ( together with the drcamrcensorship and the 
“ secondary elaboration ” to be mentioned later) represents the 
ego’s contribution to the dream, must thus always be taken into 
account as a motive of dream-formation, and every successful 
dream is a fulfilment of this wish. The relation of this general, 
constantly present, and unvarying sleep-wish to the other wishes 
of which now one and now another is fulfilled by the dream- 
content, will be the subject of later consideration. In the wish to 
sleep we have discovered a motive capable of supplying the de- 
ficiency in the theory of Striimpell and Wundt, and of explaining 
the perversity and capriciousness of the interpretation of the 
external stimulus. The correct interpretation, of which the sleep- 
ing mind is perfectly capable, would involve active interest, and 
would require the sleeper to wake; hence, of those interpreta- 
tions which are possible at all only such are admitted as are ac- 
ceptable to the dictatorial censorship of the sleep-wish. The logic 
of dream situations would run, for example: “It is the night- 
ingale, and not the lark.” For if it is the lark, love’s night is at an 
end. From among the interpretations of the stimulus which are 
thus admissible, that one is selected which can secure the best 
connection with the wish-impulses that are lying in wait in the 

38 The two sources from which I know of this dream do not entirely agree 
as to its content. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


135 

mind. Thus everything is definitely determined, and nothing is 
left to caprice. The misinterpretation is not an illusion, but — if 
you will — an excuse. Here again, as in substitution by displace- 
ment in the service of the dream-censorship, we have an act of 
deflection of the normal psychic procedure. 

If the external nerve-stimuli and the inner bodily stimuli are 
sufficiently intense to compel psychic attention, they represent— 
that is, if they result in dreaming at all, and not in waking — a 
fixed point for dream-formation, a nucleus in the dream-material, 
for which an appropriate wish-fulfilment is sought, just as (see 
above) mediating ideas between two psychical dream-stimuli 
are sought. To this extent it is true of a number of dreams that 
the somatic element dictates the dream-content. In this extreme 
case even a wish that is not actually present may be aroused for 
the purpose of dream-formation. But the dream cannot do other- 
wise than represent a wish in some situation as fulfilled; it is, 
as it were, confronted with the task of discovering what wish can 
be represented as fulfilled by the given sensation. Even if this 
given material is of a painful or disagreeable character, yet it is 
not unserviceable for the purposes of dream-formation. The 
psychic life has at its disposal even wishes whose fulfilment 
evokes displeasure, which seems a contradiction, but becomes 
perfectly intelligible if we take into account the presence of two 
sorts of psychic instance and the censorship that subsists be- 
tween them. 

In the psychic life there exist, as we have seen, repressed 
wishes, which belong to the first system, and to whose fulfilment 
the second system is opposed. We do not mean this in a historic 
sense — that such wishes have once existed and have subsequently 
been destroyed. The doctrine of repression , which we need in the 
study of psychoneuroses, asserts that such repressed wishes still 
exist, but simultaneously with an inhibition which weighs them 
down. Language has hit upon the truth when it speaks of the 
“suppression” (sub-pression, or pushing under) of such im- 
pulses. The psychic mechanism which enables such suppressed 
wishes to force their way to realization is retained in being and 
in working order. But if it happens that such a suppressed wish 
is fulfilled, the vanquished inhibition of the second system 



136 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

(which is capable of consciousness) is then expressed as discom- 
fort. And, in order to conclude this argument: If sensations of a 
disagreeable character which originate from somatic sources are 
present during sleep, this constellation is utilized by the dream- 
activity to procure the fulfilment— with more or less main- 
tenance of the censorship — of an otherwise suppressed wish. 

This state of affairs makes possible a certain number of 
anxiety-dreams, while others of these dream-formations which 
are unfavourable to the wish-theory exhibit a different mechan- 
ism. For the anxiety in dreams may of course be of a psycho- 
neurotic character, originating in psychosexual excitation, in 
which case, the anxiety corresponds to repressed libido. Then 
this anxiety, like the whole anxiety-dream, has the significance 
of a neurotic symptom, and we stand at the dividing-line where 
the wish-fulfilling tendency of dreams is frustrated. But in other 
anxiety-dreams the feeling of anxiety comes from somatic sources 
(as in the case of persons suffering from pulmonary or cardiac 
trouble, with occasional difficulty in breathing), and then it is 
used to help such strongly suppressed wishes to attain fulfilment 
in a dream, the dreaming of which from psychic motives would 
have resulted in the same release of anxiety. It is not difficult to 
reconcile these two apparently contradictory cases. When two 
psychic formations, an affective inclination and a conceptual 
content, are intimately connected, either one being actually 
present will evoke the other, even in a dream ; now the anxiety of 
somatic origin evokes the suppressed conceptual content, now 
it is the released conceptual content, accompanied by sexual ex- 
citement, which causes the release of anxiety. In the one case it 
may be said that a somatically determined affect is psychically 
interpreted; in the other case all is of psychic origin, but the 
content which has been suppressed is easily replaced by a 
somatic interpretation which fits the anxiety. The difficulties 
which lie in the way of understanding all this have little to do 
with dreams; they are due to the fact that in discussing these 
points we are touching upon the problems of the development of 
anxiety and of repression. 

The general aggregate of bodily sensation must undoubtedly 
be included among the dominant dream-stimuli of internal bodily 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 137 

origin. Not that it is capable of supplying the dream-content; 
but it forces the dream-thoughts to make a choice from the ma- 
terial destined to serve the purpose of representation in the 
dream-content, inasmuch as it brings within easy reach that part 
of the material which is adapted to its own character, and holds 
the rest at a distance. Moreover, this general feeling, which sur- 
vives from the preceding day, is of course connected with the 
psychic residues that are significant for the dream. Moreover, 
this feeling itself may be either maintained or overcome in the 
dream, so that it may, if it is painful, veer round into its opposite. 

If the somatic sources of excitation during sleep — that is, the 
sensations of sleep — are not of unusual intensity, the part which 
they play in dream-formation is, in my judgment, similar to that 
of those impressions of the day which are still recent, but of no 
great significance. I mean that they are utilized for the dream- 
formation if they are of such a kind that they can be united with 
the conceptual content of the psychic dream-source, but not 
otherwise. They are treated as a cheap ever-ready material, 
which can be used whenever it is needed, and not as valuable 
material which itself prescribes the manner in which it must be 
utilized. I might suggest the analogy of a connoisseur giving an 
artist a rare stone, a piece of onyx, for example, in order that it 
may be fashioned into a work of art. Here the size of the stone, 
its colour, and its markings help to decide what head or what 
scene shall be represented; while if he is dealing with a uniform 
and abundant material such as marble or sandstone, the artist is 
guided only by the idea which takes shape in his mind. Only in 
this way, it seems to me, can we explain the fact that the dream- 
content furnished by physical stimuli of somatic origin which 
are not unusually accentuated does not make its appearance in 
all dreams and every night . 38 

Perhaps an example which takes us back to the interpretation 
of dreams will best illustrate my meaning. One day I was trying 

as Rank has shown, in a number of studies, that certain awakening-dreams 
provoked by organic stimuli (dreams of urination and ejaculation) are 
especially calculated to demonstrate the conflict between the need for sleep 
and the demands of the organic need, as well as the influence of the latter 
on the dream-content. 



138 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

to understand the significance of the sensation of being inhibited, 
of not being able to move from the spot, of not being able to get 
something done, etc., which occurs so frequently in dreams, and 
is so closely allied to anxiety. That night I had the following 
dream: I am very incompletely dressed, and I go from a flat 
on the ground-floor up a flight of stairs to an upper story. In 
doing this I jump up three stairs at a time , and I am glad to find 
that I can mount the stairs so quickly. Sudcnly I notice that a 
servant-maid is coming down the stairs — that is, towards me. I 
am ashamed, and try to hurry away, and now comes this feeling 
of being inhibited; I am glued to the stairs, and cannot move 
from the spot. 

Analysis: The situation of the dream is taken from an every- 
day reality. In a house in Vienna I have two apartments, which 
are connected only by the main staircase. My consultation-rooms 
and my study are on the raised ground-floor, and my living- 
rooms are on the first floor. Late at night, when I have finished 
my work downstairs, I go upstairs to my bedroom. On the 
evening before the dream I had actually gone this short distance 
with my garments in disarray — that is, I had taken off my collar, 
tie and cuffs; but in the dream this had changed into a more 
advanced, but, as usual, indefinite degree of undress. It is a 
habit of mine to run up two or three steps at a time; moreover, 
there was a wish-fulfilment recognized even in the dream, for 
the ease with which I run upstairs reassures me as to the condi- 
tion of my heart. Further, the manner in which I run upstairs 
is an effective contrast to the sensation of being inhibited, which 
occurs in the second half of the dream. It shows me — what 
needed no proof — that dreams have no difficulty in representing 
motor actions fully and completely carried out; think, for ex- 
ample, of flying in dreams! 

But the stairs up which I go are not those of my own house; 
at first I do not recognize them; only the person coming towards 
me informs me of their whereabouts. This woman is the maid of 
an old lady whom I visit twice daily in order to give her hypo- 
dermic injections; the stairs, too, are precisely similar to those 
which I have to climb twice a day in this old lady’s house. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


139 

How do these stairs and this woman get into my dre am ? The 
shame of not being fully dressed is undoubtedly of a sexual char- 
acter; the servant of whom I dream is older than I, surly, and 
by no means attractive. These questions remind me of the fol- 
lowing incident: When I pay my morning visit at this house I 
am usually seized with a desire to clear my throat; the sputum 
falls on the stairs. There is no spittoon on either of the two 
floors, and I consider that the stairs should be kept clean not at 
my expense, but rather by the provision of a spittoon. The 
housekeeper, another elderly, curmudgeonly person, but, as I 
willingly admit, a woman of cleanly instincts, takes a different 
view of the matter. She lies in wait for me, to see whether I shall 
take the liberty referred to, and if she sees that I do I can dis- 
tinctly hear her growl. For days thereafter, when we meet, she 
refuses to greet me with the customary signs of respect. On the 
day before the dream the housekeeper’s attitude was reinforced 
by that of the maid. I had just finished my usual hurried visit to 
the patient when the servant confronted me in the ante-room, 
observing: “You might as well have wiped your shoes to-day, 
doctor, before you came into the room. The red carpet is all 
dirty again from your feet.” This is the only justification for the 
appearance of the stairs and the maid in my dream. 

Between my leaping upstairs and my spitting on the stairs 
there is an intimate connection. Pharyngitis and cardiac troubles 
are both supposed to be punishments for the vice of smoking, on 
account of which vice my own housekeeper does not credit me 
with excessive tidiness, so that my reputation suffers in both 
the houses which my dream fuses into one. 

I must postpone the further interpretation of this dream until 
I can indicate the origin of the typical dream of being incom- 
pletely clothed. In the meantime, as a provisional deduction 
from the dream just related, I note that the dream-sensation of 
inhibited movement is always aroused at a point where a certain 
connection requires it. A peculiar condition of my motor system 
during sleep cannot be responsible for this dream-content, since 
a moment earlier I found myself, as though in confirmation of 
this fact, skipping lightly up the stairs. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


140 


D. TYPICAL DREAMS 

Generally speaking, we are not in a position to interpret another 
person’s dream if he is unwilling to furnish us with the uncon- 
scious thoughts which lie behind the dream-content, and for this 
reason the practical applicability of our method of dream-inter- 
pretation is often seriously restricted . 37 But there are dreams 
which exhibit a complete contrast to the individual’s customary 
liberty to endow his dream-world with a special individuality, 
thereby making it inaccessible to an alien understanding: there 
are a number of dreams which almost every one has dreamed in 
the same manner, and of which we are accustomed to assume 
that they have the same significance in the case of every dreamer. 
A peculiar interest attaches to these typical dreams, because, no 
matter who dreams them, they presumably all derive from the 
same sources, so that they would seem to be particularly fitted 
to provide us with information as to the sources of dreams. 

With quite special expectations, therefore, we shall proceed 
to test our technique of dream-interpretation on these typical 
dreams, and only with extreme reluctance shall wo admit that 
precisely in respect of this material our method is not fully veri- 
fied. In the interpretation of typical dreams we as a rule fail to 
obtain those associations from the dreamer which in other cases 
have led us to comprehension of the dream, or else these associa- 
tions are confused and inadequate, so that they do not help us 
to solve our problem. 

Why this is the case, and how we can remedy this defect in 
our technique, are points which will be discussed in a later chap- 
ter. The reader will then understand why I can deal with only 
a few of the group of typical dreams in this chapter, and why I 
have postponed the discussion of the others. 

87 The statement that our method of dream-interpretation is inapplicable 
when we have not at our disposal the dreamer’s association-material must 
be qualified. In one case our work of interpretation is independent of these 
associations: namely, when the dreamer makes use of symbolic elements in 
his dream. We then employ what is, strictly speaking, a second or auxiliary 
method of dream-interpretation ( vid. inf .) . 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 


141 


(a) The Embarrassment-Dream of Nakedness 

In a dream in which one is naked or scantily clad in the presence 
of strangers, it sometimes happens that one is not in the least 
ashamed of one’s condition. But the dream of nakedness de m ands 
our attention only when shame and embarrassment are felt in it, 
when one wishes to escape or to hide, and when one feels the 
strange inhibition of being unable to stir from the spot, and of 
being utterly powerless to alter the painful situation. It is only 
in this connection that the dream is typical; otherwise the 
nucleus of its content may be involved in all sorts of other con- 
nections, or may be replaced by individual amplifications. The 
essential point is that one has a painful feeling of shame, and 
is anxious to hide one’s nakedness, usually by means of locomo- 
tion, but is absolutely unable to do so. I believe that the great 
majority of my readers will at some time have found themselves 
in this situation in a dream. 

The nature and manner of the exposure is usually rather 
vague. The dreamer will say, perhaps, “I was in my chemise/’ 
but this is rarely a clear image; in most cases the lack of clothing 
is so indeterminate that it is described in narrating the dream by 
an alternative: “I was in my chemise or my petticoat.” As a rule 
the deficiency in clothing is not serious enough to justify the 
feeling of shame attached to it. For a man who has served in 
the army, nakedness is often replaced by a manner of dressing 
that is contrary to regulations. “I was in the street without my 
sabre, and I saw some officers approaching,” or “I had no collar,” 
or “I was wearing checked civilian trousers,” etc. 

The persons before whom one is ashamed are almost always 
strangers, whose faces remain indeterminate. It never happens, 
in the typical dream, that one is reproved or even noticed on 
account of the lack of clothing which causes one such em- 
barrassment. On the contrary, the people in the dream appear to 
be quite indifferent; or, as I was able to note in one particularly 
vivid dream, they have stiff and solemn expressions. This gives 
us food for thought. 



142 THE INTEki’KETATION 01>' DREAMS 

The dreamer’s embarrassment and the spectator’s indifference 
constitute a contradiction such as often occurs in dreams. It 
would be more in keeping with the dreamer's feelings if the 
strangers were to look at him in astonishment, or were to laugh 
at him, or be outraged. I think, however, that this obnoxious 
feature has been displaced by wish-fulfilment, while the em- 
barrassment is for some reason retained, so that the two com- 
ponents are not in agreement. We have an interesting proof that 
the dream which is partially distorted by wish-fulfilment has 
not been properly understood; for it has been made the basis of 
a fairy-tale familiar to us all in Andersen’s version of 'The Em- 
peror’s New Clothes, and it has more recently received poetical 
treatment by Fulda in The Talisman. In Andersen’s fairy-tale 
we are told of two impostors who weave a costly garment for the 
Emperor, which shall, however, be visible only to the good and 
true. The Emperor goes forth clad in this invisible garment, and 
since the imaginary fabric serves as a sort of touchstone, the 
people are frightened into behaving as though they did not 
notice the Emperor’s nakedness. 

But this is really the situation in our dream. It is not very 
venturesome to assume that the unintelligible dream-content has 
provided an incentive to invent a state of undress which gives 
meaning to the situation present in the memory. This situation 
is thereby robbed of its original meaning, and made to serve alien 
ends. But we shall see that such a misunderstanding of the 
dream-content often occurs through the conscious activity of a 
second psychic system, and is to be recognized as a factor of 
the final form of the dream; and further, that in the develop- 
ment of obsessions and phobias similar misunderstandings — still, 
of course, within the same psychic personality — play a decisive 
part. It is even possible to specify whence the material for the 
fresh interpretation of the dream is taken. The impostor is the 
dream, the Emperor is the dreamer himself, and the moralizing 
tendency betrays a hazy knowledge of the fact that there is a 
question, in the latent dream-content, of forbidden wishes, vic- 
tims of repression. The connection in which such dreams appear 
during my analyses of neurotics proves beyond a doubt that a 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


143 

memory of the dreamer’s earliest childhood lies at the founda- 
tion of the dream. Only in our childhood was there a time when 
we were seen by our relatives, as well as by strange nurses, 
servants and visitors, in a state of insufficient clothing, and at 
that time we were not ashamed of our nakedness . 38 In the case 
of many rather older children it may be observed that being un- 
dressed has an exciting effect upon them, instead of making them 
feel ashamed. They laugh, leap about, slap or thump their own 
bodies; the mother, or whoever is present, scolds them, saying: 
“Fie, that is shameful — you mustn’t do that!” Children often 
show a desire to display themselves; it is hardly possible to pass 
through a village in country districts without meeting a two- or 
three-year-old child who lifts up his or her blouse or frock 
before the traveller, possibly in his honour. One of my patients 
has retained in his conscious memory a scene from his eighth 
year, in which, after undressing for bed, he wanted to dance into 
his little sister’s room in his shirt, but was prevented by the 
servant. In the history of the childhood of neurotics exposure 
before children of the opposite sex plays a prominent part; in 
paranoia the delusion of being observed while dressing and un- 
dressing may be directly traced to these experiences; and among 
those who have remained perverse there is a class in whom the 
childish impulse is accentuated into a symptom: the class of 
exhibitionists . 

This age of childhood, in which the sense of shame is un- 
known, seems a paradise when we look back upon it later, and 
paradise itself is nothing but the mass-phantasy of the childhood 
of the individual. This is why in paradise men are naked and 
unashamed, until the moment arrives when shame and fear 
awaken; expulsion follows, and sexual life and cultural develop- 
ment begin. Into this paradise dreams can take us back every 
night; we have already ventured the conjecture that the impres- 
sions of our earliest childhood (from the prehistoric period until 
about the end of the third year) crave reproduction for their 
own sake, perhaps without further reference to their content, so 

38 The child appears in the fairy-tale also, for there a little child suddenly 
cries out: “But he hasn’t anything on at all I” 



144 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

that their repetition is a wish- fulfilment. Dreams of nakedness, 
then, are exhibition-dreams . 30 

The nucleus of an exhibition-dream is furnished by one’s own 
person, which is seen not as that of a child, but as it exists in the 
present, and by the idea of scanty clothing which emerges indis- 
tinctly, owing to the superimposition of so many later situations 
of being partially clothed, or out of consideration for the cen- 
sorship; to these elements are added the persons in whose pres- 
ence one is ashamed. I know of no example in which the actual 
spectators of these infantile exhibitions reappear in a dream; 
for a dream is hardly ever a simple recollection. Strangely 
enough, those persons who are the objects of our sexual interest 
in childhood are omitted from all reproductions, in dreams, in 
hysteria or in obsessional neurosis; paranoia alone restores the 
spectators, and is fanatically convinced of their presence, al- 
though they remain unseen. The substitute for these persons 
offered by the dream, the “number of strangers” who take no 
notice of the spectacle offered them, is precisely the counter-wish 
to that single intimately-known person for whom the exposure 
was intended. “A number of strangers,” moreover, often occur in 
dreams in all sorts of other connections; as a counter-wish they 
always signify “a secret .” 40 It will be seen that even that restitu- 
tion of the old state of affairs that occurs in paranoia complies 
with this counter-tendency. One is no longer alone; one is quite 
positively being watched; but the spectators are “a number of 
strange, curiously indeterminate people.” 

Furthermore, repression finds a place in the exhibition-dream. 
For the disagreeable sensation of the dream is, of course, the 
reaction on the part of the second psychic instance to the fact 
that the exhibitionistic scene which has been condemned by the 
censorship has nevertheless succeeded in presenting itself. The 
only way to avoid this sensation would be to refrain from re- 
viving the scene. 

Ferenczi has recorded a number of interesting dreams of nakedness in 
women which were without difficulty traced to the infantile delight in 
exhibitionism, but which differ in many features from the “typical” dream 
of nakedness discussed above. 

40 For obvious reasons the presence of “the whole family” in the dream has 
the same significance. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS I45 

In a later chapter we shall deal once again with the feeling 
of inhibition. In our dreams it represents to perfection a conflict 
of the will, a denial. According to our unconscious purpose, the 
exhibition is to proceed; according to the demands of the cen- 
sorship, it is to come to an end. 

The relation of our typical dreams to fairy-tales and other 
fiction and poetry is neither sporadic nor accidental. Sometimes 
the penetrating insight of the poet has analytically recognized 
the process of transformation of which the poet is otherwise the 
instrument, and has followed it up in the reverse direction; that 
is to say, has traced a poem to a dream. A friend has called my 
attention to the following passage in G. Keller’s Der Grtine 
Heinrich: “I do not wish, dear Lee, that you should ever come to 
realize from experience the exquisite and piquant truth in the 
situation of Odysseus, when he appears, naked and covered with 
mud, before Nausicaa and her playmates! Would you like to 
know what it means? Let us for a moment consider the incident 
closely. If you are ever parted from your home, and from all 
that is dear to you, and wander about in a strange country; if 
you have seen much and experienced much; if you have cares and 
sorrows, and are, perhaps, utterly wretched and forlorn, you 
will some night inevitably dream that you are approaching your 
home; you will see it shining and glittering in the loveliest 
colours; lovely and gracious figures will come to meet you; and 
then you will suddenly discover that you are ragged, naked, and 
covered with dust. An indescribable feeling of shame and fear 
overcomes you ; you try to cover yourself, to hide, and you wake 
up bathed in sweat. As long as humanity exists, this will be the 
dream of the care-laden, tempest-tossed man, and thus Homer 
has drawn this situation from the profoundest depths of the 
eternal nature of humanity.” 

What are the profoundest depths of the eternal nature of 
humanity, which the poet commonly hopes to awaken in his 
listeners, but these stirrings of the psychic life which are rooted 
in that age of childhood, which subsequently become prehis- 
toric? Childish wishes, now suppressed and forbidden, break into 
the dream behind the unobjectionable and permissibly conscious 
wishes of the homeless man, and it is for this reason that the 



146 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

dream which is objectified in the legend of Nausicaa regularly 
develops into an anxiety-dream. 

My own dream of hurrying upstairs, which presently changed 
into being glued to the stairs, is likewise an exhibition-dream, 
for it reveals the essential ingredients of such a dream. It must 
therefore be possible to trace it back to experiences in my child- 
hood, and the knowledge of these should enable us to conclude 
how far the servant's behaviour to me (i.e. her reproach that I 
had soiled the carpet) helped her to secure the position which 
she occupies in the dream. Now I am actually able to furnish the 
desired explanation. One learns in a psychoanalysis to interpret 
temporal proximity by material connection; two ideas which 
are apparently without connection, but which occur in immediate 
succession, belong to a unity which has to be deciphered; just 
as an a and a b, when written in succession, must be pronounced 
as one syllable, ab. It is just the same with the interrelations of 
dreams. The dream of the stairs has been taken from a series of 
dreams with whose other members I am familiar, having inter- 
preted them. A dream included in this series must belong to the 
same context. Now, the other dreams of the series are based on 
the memory of a nurse to whom I was entrusted for a season, 
from the time when I was still at the breast to the age of two 
and a half, and of whom a hazy recollection has remained in 
my consciousness. According to information which I recently 
obtained from my mother, she was old and ugly, but very intelli- 
gent and thorough; according to the inferences which I am 
justified in drawing from my dreams, she did not always treat 
me quite kindly, but spoke harshly to me when I showed insuffi- 
cient understanding of the necessity for cleanliness. Inasmuch 
as the maid endeavoured to continue my education in this re- 
spect, she is entitled to be treated, in my dream, as an incarna- 
tion of the prehistoric old woman. It is to be assumed, of course, 
that the child was fond of his teacher in spite of her harsh be- 
haviour . 41 

41 A supplementary interpretation of this dream: To spit ( spucken ) on the 
stairs, since spuken (to haunt) is the occupation of spirits (cf. English, 
spook) , led me by a free translation to esprit d’escalier. “Stair-wit” means 
unreadiness at repartee (Schlagfertigkeit =r literally: readiness to hit out), 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


147 


(6) Dreams of the Death of Beloved Persons 

Another series of dreams which may be called typical are those 
whose content is that a beloved relative, a parent, brother, sister, 
child, or the like, has died. We must at once distinguish two 
classes of such dreams: those in which the dreamer remains un- 
moved, and those in which he feels profoundly grieved by the 
death of the beloved person, even expressing this grief by shed- 
ding tears in his sleep. 

We may ignore the dreams of the first group; they have no 
claim to be reckoned as typical. If they are analysed, it is found 
that they signify something that is not contained in them, that 
they are intended to mask another wish of some kind. This is the 
case in the dream of the aunt who sees the only son of her sister 
lying on a bier (p. 60). The dream does not mean that she 
desires the death of her little nephew; as we have learned, it 
merely conceals the wish to see a certain beloved person again 
after a long separation — the same person whom she had seen 
after as long an interval at the funeral of another nephew. This 
wish, which is the real content of the dream, gives no cause for 
sorrow, and for that reason no sorrow is felt in the dream. We 
see here that the feeling contained in the dream does not belong 
to the manifest, but to the latent dream-content, and that the 
affective content has remained free from the distortion which 
has befallen the conceptual content. 

It is otherwise with those dreams in which the death of a be- 
loved relative is imagined, and in which a painful affect is felt. 
These signify, as their content tells us, the wish that the person 
in question might die; and since I may here expect that the 
feelings of all my readers and of all who have had such dreams 
will lead them to reject my explanation, I must endeavour to 
rest my proof on the broadest possible basis. 

We have already cited a dream from which we could see that 
the wishes represented as fulfilled in dreams are not always cur- 
rent wishes. They may also be bygone, discarded, buried and 

with which I really have to reproach myself. But was the nurse deficient in 
Schlagjeriigkeit ? 



148 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

repressed wishes, which we must nevertheless credit with a sort 
of continued existence, merely on account of their reappearance 
in a dream. They are not dead, like persons who have died, in 
the sense that we know death, but are rather like the shades in 
the Odyssey which awaken to a certain degree of life so soon 
as they have drunk blood. The dream of the dead child in the 
box (p. 62) contained a wish that had been present fifteen 
years earlier, and which had at that time been frankly admitted 
as real. Further — and this, perhaps, is not unimportant from the 
standpoint of the theory of dreams — a recollection from the 
dreamer’s earliest childhood was at the root of this wish also. 
When the dreamer was a little child— but exactly when cannot 
be definitely determined — she heard that her mother, during the 
pregnancy of which she was the outcome, had fallen into a pro- 
found emotional depression, and had passionately wished for 
the death of the child in her womb. Having herself grown up and 
become pregnant, she was only following the example of her 
mother. 

If anyone dreams that his father or mother, his brother or 
sister, has died, and his dream expresses grief, I should never 
adduce this as proof that he wishes any of them dead now . The 
theory of dreams does not go as far as to require this ; it is sat- 
isfied with concluding that the dreamer has wished them dead 
at some time or other during his childhood. I fear, however, that 
this limitation will not go far to appease my critics; probably 
they will just as energetically deny the possibility that they ever 
had such thoughts, as they protest that they do not harbour them 
now. I must, therefore, reconstruct a portion of the submerged 
infantile psychology on the basis of the evidence of the present. 42 

Let us first of all consider the relation of children to their 
brothers and sisters. I do not know why we presuppose that it 
must be a loving one, since examples of enmity among adult 
brothers and sisters are frequent in everyone’s experience, and 
since we are so often able to verify the fact that this estrange- 

Cf. Also: Analyse der Phobic tines funfjdhrigen Knaben in the Jahrbuch 
fur psychoinal und psychopath . Forschungen, Bd. i, 1909 (Ges. Schriften , 
Bd, viii), and Uber infantile Sexualtheorien, in the Sammlung kleiner 
Schriften zur Neurosenlehre (Ges, Schriften, Bd. v). 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 1 49 

ment originated during childhood, or has always existed. More- 
over, many adults who to-day are devoted to their brothers and 
sisters, and support them in adversity, lived with them in almost 
continuous enmity during their childhood. The elder child ill- 
treated the younger, slandered him, and robbed him of his toys; 
the younger was consumed with helpless fury against the elder, 
envied and feared him, or his earliest impulse toward liberty 
and his first revolt against injustice were directed against his 
oppressor. The parents say that the children do not agree, and 
cannot find the reason for it. It is not difficult to see that the 
character even of a well-behaved child is not the character we 
should wish to find in an adult. A child is absolutely egoistical; 
he feels his wants acutely, and strives remorselessly to satisfy 
them, especially against his competitors, other children, and first 
of all against his brothers and sisters. And yet we do not on that 
account call a child “wicked” — we call him “naughty”; he is 
not responsible for his misdeeds, either in our own judgment or 
in the eyes of the law. And this is as it should be; for we may 
expect that within the very period of life which we reckon as 
childhood, altruistic impulses and morality will awake in the 
little egoist, and that, in the words of Meynert, a secondary ego 
will overlay and inhibit the primary ego. Morality, of course, 
does not develop simultaneously in all its departments, and fur- 
thermore, the duration of the amoral period of childhood differs 
in different individuals. Where this morality fails to develop we 
are prone to speak of “degeneration”; but here the case is obvi- 
ously one of arrested development. Where the primary character 
is already overlaid by the later development it may be at least 
partially uncovered again by an attack of hysteria. The cor- 
respondence between the so-called hysterical character and that 
of a naughty child is positively striking. The obsessional neurosis, 
on the other hand, corresponds to a super-morality, which de- 
velops as a strong reinforcement against the primary character 
that is threatening to revive. 

Many persons, then, who now love their brothers and sisters, 
and who would feel bereaved by their death, harbour in their 
unconscious hostile wishes, survivals from an earlier period, 
wishes which are able to realize themselves in dreams. It is, how- 



150 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

ever, quite especially interesting to observe the behaviour of 
little children up to their third and fourth year towards their 
younger brothers or sisters.Sofar the child has been the only one; 
now he is informed that the stork has brought a new baby. The 
child inspects the new arrival, and expresses his opinion with 
decision: “The stork had better take it back again !” 43 

I seriously declare it as my opinion that a child is able to 
estimate the disadvantages which he has to expect on account of 
a new-comer. A connection of mine, who now gets on very well 
with a sister, who is four years her junior, responded to the news 
of this sister’s arrival with the reservation: “But I shan’t give 
her my red cap, anyhow.” If the child should come to realize 
only at a later stage that its happiness may be prejudiced by a 
younger brother or sister, its enmity will be aroused at this 
period. I know of a case where a girl, not three years of age, tried 
to strangle an infant in its cradle, because she suspected that its 
continued presence boded her no good. Children at this time of 
life are capable of a jealousy that is perfectly evident and ex- 
tremely intense. Again, perhaps the little brother or sister really 
soon disappears, and the child once more draws to himself the 
whole affection of the household; then a new child is sent by 
the stork; is it not natural that the favourite should conceive the 
wish that the new rival may meet the same fate as the earlier 
one, in order that he may be as happy as he was before the birth 
of the first child, and during the interval after his death ? 44 Of 
course, this attitude of the child towards the younger brother or 
sister is, under normal circumstances, a mere function of the 
difference of age. After a certain interval the maternal instincts 

43 Hans, whose phobia was the subject of the analysis in the above-men- 
tioned pi^lication, cried out at the age of three and a half, while feverish, 
shortly after the birth of a sister: “But I don’t want to have a little sister.” 
In his neurosis, eighteen months later, he frankly confessed the wish that his 
mother should drop the child into the bath while bathing it, in order that 
it might die. With all this, Hans was a good-natured, affectionate child, 
who soon became fond of his sister, and took her under his special protec- 
tion. 

44 Such cases of death in the experience of children may soon be forgotten 
in the family, but psychoanalytical investigation shows that they are very 
significant for a later neurosis. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 151 

of the older girl will be awakened towards the helpless new-born 
infant. 

Feelings of hostility towards brothers and sisters must occur 
far more frequently in children than is observed by their obtuse 
elders . 45 

In the case of my own children, who followed one another 
rapidly, I missed the opportunity of making such observations. 
I am now retrieving it, thanks to my little nephew, whose un- 
disputed domination was disturbed after fifteen months by the 
arrival of a feminine rival. I hear, it is true, that the young man 
behaves very chivalrously toward his little sister, that he kisses 
her hand and strokes her; but in spite of this I have convinced 
myself that even before the completion of his second year he is 
using his new command of language to criticize this person, who, 
to him, after all, seems superfluous. Whenever the conversation 
turns upon her he chimes in, and cries angrily: “Too (l)ittle, 
too (l)ittle ! >7 During the last few months, since the child has 
outgrown this disparagement, owing to her splendid develop- 
ment, he has found another reason for his insistence that she 
does not deserve so much attention. He reminds us, on every 
suitable pretext: “She hasn't any teeth .” 46 We all of us recollect 
the case of the eldest daughter of another sister of mine. The 
child, who was then six years of age, spent a full half-hour in 
going from one aunt to another with the question: “Lucie can't 

46 Since the above was written a great many observations relating to the 
originally hostile attitude of children toward their brothers and sisters, and 
toward one of their parents, have been recorded in the literature of psycho- 
analysis. One writer, Spitteler, gives the following peculiarly sincere and 
ingenuous description of this typical childish attitude as he experienced it 
in his earliest childhood: “Moreover, there was now a second Adolf. A little 
creature whom they declared was my brother, but I could not understand 
what he could be for, or why they should pretend he was a being like my- 
self. I was sufficient unto myself: what did I want with a brother? And he 
was not only useless, he was also even troublesome. When I plagued my 
grandmother, he too wanted to plague her; when I was wheeled about in the 
baby-carriage he sat opposite me, and took up half the room, so that we 
could not help kicking one another.” 

46 The three-and-a-half-year-old Hans embodied his devastating criticism 
of his little sister in these identical words (loc. tit.) He assumed that sha 
was unable to speak on account of her lack of teeth. 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


*52 

understand that yet, can she?” Lucie was her rival— two and a 
half years younger. 

I have never failed to come across this dream of the death of 
brothers or sisters, denoting an intense hostility, e.g. I have met 
it in all my female patients. I have met with only one exception, 
which could easily be interpreted into a confirmation of the rule. 
Once, in the course of a sitting, when I was explaining this state 
of affairs to a female patient, since it seemed to have some 
bearing on the symptoms under consideration that day, she 
answered, to my astonishment, that she had never had such 
dreams. But another dream occurred to her, which presumably 
had nothing to do with the case — a dream which she had first 
dreamed at the age of four, when she was the youngest child, 
and had since then dreamed repeatedly. “A number of children , 
all her brothers and sisters with her boy and girl cousins, were 
romping about in a meadow . Suddenly they all grew wings, flew 
up, and were gone ” She had no idea of the significance of this 
dream; but we can hardly fail to recognize it as a dream of the 
death of all the brothers and sisters, in its original form, and 
but little influenced by the censorship. I will venture to add the 
following analysis of it: on the death of one out of this large 
number of children — in this case the children of two brothers 
were brought up together as brothers and sisters — would not 
our dreamer, at that time not yet four years of age, have asked 
some wise, grown-up person: “What becomes of children when 
they are dead?” The answer would probably have been: “They 
grow wings and become angels.” After this explanation, all the 
brothers and sisters and cousins in the dream now have wings, 
like angels and — this is the important point — they fly away. 
Our little angel-maker is left alone: just think, the only one out 
of such a crowd I That the children romp about a meadow, from 
which they fly away, points almost certainly to butterflies — it 
is as though the child had been influenced by the same associa- 
tion of ideas which led the ancients to imagine Psyche, the soul, 
with the wings of a butterfly. 

Perhaps some readers will now object that the inimical im- 
pulses of children toward their brothers and sisters may perhaps 
be admitted, but how does the childish character arrive at such 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 1 53 

heights of wickedness as to desire the death of a rival or a 
stronger playmate, as though all misdeeds could be atoned for 
only by death? Those who speak in this fashion forget that the 
child’s idea of “being dead” has little but the word in common 
with our own. The child knows nothing of the horrors of decay, 
of shivering in the cold grave, of the terror of the infinite Noth- 
ing, the thought of which the adult, as all the myths of the 
hereafter testify, finds so intolerable. The fear of death is alien 
to the child; and so he plays with the horrid word, and threatens 
another child: “If you do that again, you will die, just like 
Francis died;” at which the poor mother shudders, unable per- 
haps to forget that the greater proportion of mortals do not 
survive beyond the years of childhood. Even at the age of eight, 
a child returning from a visit to a natural history museum may 
say to her mother: “Mamma, I do love you so; if you ever die, J 
am going to have you stuffed and set you up here in the room, so 
that I can always, always see you!” So different from our own 
is the childish conception of being dead . 47 

Being dead means, for the child, who has been spared the 
sight of the suffering that precedes death, much the same as “be- 
ing gone,” and ceasing to annoy the survivors. The child does 
not distinguish the means by which this absence is brought 
about, whether by distance, or estrangement, or death . 48 If, dur- 
ing the child’s prehistoric years, a nurse has been dismissed, and 
if his mother dies a little while later, the two experiences, as we 

47 To my astonishment, I was told that a highly intelligent boy of ten, after 
the sudden death of his father, said: “I understand that father is dead, but 
I can’t see why he does not come home to supper.” Further material relating 
to this subject will be found in the section Kinder seele, edited by Frau Dr. 
von Hug-Hellmuth, in Imago Bd. i-v, 1912-18. 

48 The observation of a father trained in psychoanalysis was able to detect 
the very moment when his very intelligent little daughter, aged four, real- 
ized the difference between “being away” and “being dead.” The child was 
being troublesome at table, and noted that one of the waitresses in the 
pension was looking at her with an expression of annoyance. “Josephine 
ought to be dead,” she thereupon remarked to her father. “But why dead?” 
asked the father, soothingly. “Wouldn’t it be enough if she went away?” 
“No,” replied the child, “then she would come back again.” To the uncurbed 
self-love ( narcissism ) of the child every inconvenience constitutes the crime 
of Use majestl , and, as in the Draconian code, the child’s feelings prescribe 
for all such crimes the one invariable punishment. 



THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


154 

discover by analysis, form links of a chain in his memory. The 
fact that the child does not very intensely miss those who are 
absent has been realized, to her sorrow, by many a mother, 
when she has returned home from an absence of several weeks, 
and has been told, upon inquiry: “The children have not asked 
for their mother once.” But if she really departs to “that un- 
discovered country from whose bourne no traveller returns,” the 
children seem at first to have forgotten her, and only subse- 
quently do they begin to remember their dead mother. 

While, therefore, the child has its motives for desiring the 
absence of another child, it is lacking in all those restraints 
which would prevent it from clothing this wish in the form of a 
death-wish; and the psychic reaction to dreams of a death-wish 
proves that, in spite of all the differences of content, the wish in 
the case of the child is after all identical with the corresponding 
wish in an adult. 

If, then, the death-wish of a child in respect of his brothers 
and sisters is explained by his childish egoism, which makes him 
regard his brothers and sisters as rivals, how are we to account 
for the same wish in respect of his parents, who bestow their 
love on him, and satisfy his needs, and whose preservation he 
ought to desire for these very egoistical reasons? 

Towards a solution of this difficulty we may be guided by our 
knowledge that the very great majority of dreams of the death 
of a parent refer to the parent of the same sex as the dreamer, 
so that a man generally dreams of the death of his father, and 
a woman of the death of her mother. I do not claim that this 
happens constantly; but that it happens in a great majority of 
cases is so evident that it requires explanation by some factor of 
general significance . 49 Broadly speaking, it is as though a sexual 
preference made itself felt at an early age, as though the boy 
regarded his father, and the girl her mother, as a rival in love — 
by whose removal he or she could but profit. 

Before rejecting this idea as monstrous, let the reader again 
consider the actual relations between parents and children. We 

49 The situation is frequently disguised by the intervention of a tendency to 
punishment, which in the form of a moral reaction, threatens the loss of 
the beloved parent. 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 155 

must distinguish between the traditional standard of conduct, 
the filial piety expected in this relation, and what daily observa- 
tion shows us to be the fact. More than one occasion for enmity 
lies hidden amidst the relations of parents and children; condi- 
tions are present in the greatest abundance under which wishes 
which cannot pass the censorship are bound to arise. Let us first 
consider the relation between father and son. In my opinion the 
sanctity with which we have endorsed the injunctions of the 
Decalogue dulls our perception of the reality. Perhaps we hardly 
dare permit ourselves to perceive that the greater part of hu- 
manity neglects to obey the fifth commandment. In the lowest 
as well as in the highest strata of human society, filial piety 
towards parents is wont to recede before other interests. The 
obscure legends which have been handed down to us from the 
primeval ages of human society in mythology and folklore give 
a deplorable idea of the despotic power of the father, and the 
ruthlessness with which it was exercised. Kronos devours his 
children, as the wild boar devours the litter of the sow; Zeus 
emasculates his father 50 and takes his place as ruler. The more 
tyrannically the father ruled in the ancient family, the more 
surely must the son, as his appointed successor, have assumed 
the position of an enemy, and the greater must have been his 
impatience to attain to supremacy through the death of his 
father. Even in our own middle-class families the father com- 
monly fosters the growth of the germ of hatred which is naturally 
inherent in the paternal relation, by refusing to allow the son to 
be a free agent or by denying him the means of becoming so. A 
physician often has occasion to remark that a son’s grief at the 
loss of his father cannot quench his gratification that he has at 
last obtained his freedom. Fathers, as a rule, cling desperately 
to as much of the sadly antiquated potestas patris jamilias as 
still survives in our modern society, and the poet who, like 
Ibsen, puts the immemorial strife between father and son in the 

50 At least in some of the mythological accounts. According to others, 
emasculation was inflicted only by Kronos on his father Uranos. 

With regard to the mythological significance of this motive, cf. Otto 
Rank’s Der My thus von der Geburt des Helden, in Heft v of Schriften zur 
angew. Seelenkunde, 1909, and Das Jnzestmotiv in Dichtung und Sage , i9 I2 » 
chap, ix, 2. 



! -6 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

foreground of his drama is sure of his effect. The causes of con- 
flict between mother and daughter arise when the daughter 
grows up and finds herself watched by her mother when she 
longs for real sexual freedom, while the mother is reminded by 
the budding beauty of her daughter that for her the time has 
come to renounce sexual claims. 

All these circumstances are obvious to everyone, but they do 
not help us to explain dreams of the death of their parents in 
persons for whom filial piety has long since come to be unques- 
tionable. We are, however, preparing by the foregoing discus- 
sion to look for the origin of a death-wish in the earliest years 
of childhood. 

In the case of psychoneurotics, analysis confirms this conjec- 
ture beyond all doubt. For analysis tells us that the sexual 
wishes of the child— in so far as they deserve this designation 
in their nascent state — awaken at a very early age, and that 
the earliest affection of the girl-child is lavished on the father, 
while the earliest infantile desires of the boy are directed upon 
the mother. For the boy the father, and for the girl the mother, 
becomes an obnoxious rival, and we have already shown, in the 
case of brothers and sisters, how readily in children this feeling 
leads to the death-wish. As a general rule, sexual selection soon 
makes its appearance in the parent; it is a natural tendency for 
the father to spoil his little daughters, and for the mother to 
take the part of the sons, while both, so long as the glamour of 
sex does not prejudice their judgment, are strict in training the 
children. The child is perfectly conscious of this partiality, and 
offers resistance to the parent who opposes it. To find love in an 
adult is for the child not merely the satisfaction of a special 
need; it means also that the child’s will is indulged in all other 
respects. Thus the child is obeying its own sexual instinct, and 
at the same time reinforcing the stimulus proceeding from the 
parents, when its choice between the parents corresponds with 
their own. 

The signs of these infantile tendencies are for the most part 
overlooked; and yet some of them may be observed even after 
the early years of childhood. An eight-year-old girl of my ac- 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 


I S7 

quaintance, whenever her mother is called away from the table, 
takes advantage of her absence to proclaim herself her suc- 
cessor. “Now I shall be Mamma; Karl, do you want some more 
vegetables? Have some more, do,” etc. A particularly clever and 
lively little girl, not yet four years of age, in whom this trait of 
child psychology is unusually transparent, says frankly: “Now 
mummy can go away; then daddy must marry me, and I will be 
his wife.” Nor does this wish by any means exclude the possibil- 
ity that the child may most tenderly love its mother. If the little 
boy is allowed to sleep at his mother’s side whenever his father 
goes on a journey, and if after his father’s return he has to go 
back to the nursery, to a person whom he likes far less, the wish 
may readily arise that his father might always be absent, so 
that he might keep his place beside his dear, beautiful mamma; 
and the father’s death is obviously a means for the attainment 
of this wish; for the child’s experience has taught him that 
“dead” folks, like grandpapa, for example, are always absent; 
they never come back. 

While such observations of young children readily accommo- 
date themselves to the interpretation suggested, they do not, it 
is true, carry the complete conviction which is forced upon a 
physician by the psychoanalysis of adult neurotics. The dreams 
of neurotic patients are communicated with preliminaries of 
such a nature that their interpretation as wish-dreams becomes 
inevitable. One day I find a lady depressed and weeping. She 
says: “I do not want to see my relatives any more; they must 
shudder at me.” Thereupon, almost without any transition, she 
tells me that she has remembered a dream, whose significance, 
of course, she does not understand. She dreamed it when she 
was four years old, and it was this: A fox or a lynx is walking 
about the roof ; then something jails down , or she falls down , 
and after that , her mother is carried out of the house — dead; 
whereat the dreamer weeps bitterly. I have no sooner informed 
her that this dream must signify a childish wish to see her 
mother dead, and that it is because of this dream that she thinks 
that her relatives must shudder at her, then she furnishes ma- 
terial in explanation of the dream. “Lynx-eye” is an opprobrious 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


*5* 

epithet which a street boy once bestowed on her when she was a 
very small child; and when she was three years old a brick or tile 
fell on her mother’s head, so that she bled profusely. 

I once had occasion to make a thorough study of a young girl 
who was passing through various psychic states. In the state of 
frenzied confusion with which her illness began, the patient 
manifested a quite peculiar aversion for her mother; she struck 
her and abused her whenever she approached the bed, while at 
the same period she was affectionate and submissive to a much 
older sister. Then there followed a lucid but rather apathetic 
condition, with badly disturbed sleep. It was in this phase that 
I began to treat her and to analyse her dreams. An enormous 
number of these dealt, in a more or less veiled fashion, with the 
death of the girl’s mother ; now she was present at the funeral of 
an old woman, now she saw herself and her sister sitting at a 
table, dressed in mourning; the meaning of the dreams could 
not be doubted. During her progressive improvement hysterical 
phobias made their appearance, the most distressing of which 
was the fear that something had happened to her mother. Wher- 
ever she might be at the time, she had then to hurry home in 
order to convince herself that her mother was still alive. Now 
this case, considered in conjunction with the rest of my experi- 
ence, was very instructive; it showed, in polyglot translations, 
as it were, the different ways in which the psychic apparatus 
reacts to the same exciting idea. In the state of confusion, which 
I regard as an overthrow of the second psychic instance by the 
first instance, at other times suppressed, the unconscious enmity 
towards the mother gained the upper hand, and found physical 
expression; then, when the patient became calmer, the insurrec- 
tion was suppressed, and the domination of the censorship re- 
stored, and this enmity had access only to the realms of dreams, 
in which it realized the wish that the mother might die; and 
after the normal condition had been still further strengthened it 
created the excessive concern for the mother as a hysterical 
counter-reaction and defensive phenomenon. In the light of 
these considerations, it is no longer inexplicable why hysterical 
girls are so often extravagantly attached to their mothers. 

On another occasion I had an opportunity of obtaining a pro- 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 1 59 

found insight into the unconscious psychic life of a young man 
for whom an obsessional neurosis made life almost unendurable, 
so that he could not go into the streets, because he was tor- 
mented by the fear that he would kill everyone he met. He spent 
his days in contriving evidence of an alibi in case he should be 
accused of any murder that might have been committed in the 
city. It goes without saying that this man was as moral as he 
was highly cultured. The analysis — which, by the way, led to a 
cure — revealed, as the basis of this distressing obsession, mur- 
derous impulses in respect of his rather overstrict father — im- 
pulses which, to his astonishment, had consciously expressed 
themselves when he was seven years old, but which, of course, 
had originated in a much earlier period of his childhood. After 
the painful illness and death of his father, when the young man 
was in his thirty-first year, the obsessive reproach made its ap- 
pearance, which transferred itself to strangers in the form of 
this phobia. Anyone capable of wishing to push his own father 
from a mountain-top into an abyss cannot be trusted to spare 
the lives of persons less closely related to him; he therefore does 
well to lock himself into his room. 

According to my already extensive experience, parents play 
a leading part in the infantile psychology of all persons who 
subsequently become psychoneurotics. Falling in love with one 
parent and hating the other forms part of the permanent stock 
of the psychic impulses which arise in early childhood, and are 
of such importance as the material of the subsequent neurosis. 
But I do not believe that psychoneurotics are to be sharply dis- 
tinguished in this respect from other persons who remain nor- 
mal — that is, I do not believe that they are capable of creating 
something absolutely new and peculiar to themselves. It is far 
more probable — and this is confirmed by incidental observa- 
tions of normal children — that in their amorous or hostile atti- 
tude toward their parents, psychoneurotics do no more than 
reveal to us, by magnification, something that occurs less mark- 
edly and intensively in the minds of the majority of children. 
Antiquity has furnished us with legendary matter which cor- 
roborates this belief, and the profound and universal validity of 
the old legends is explicable only by an equally universal valid- 



l6o THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

ity of the above-mentioned hypothesis of infantile psychology. 

I am referring to the legend of King Oedipus and the Oedipus 
Rex of Sophocles. Oedipus, the son of Laius, king of Thebes, 
and Jocasta, is exposed as a suckling, because an oracle had in- 
formed the father that his son, who was still unborn, would be 
his murderer. He is rescued, and grows up as a king’s son at a 
foreign court, until, being uncertain of his origin, he, too, con- 
sults the oracle, and is warned to avoid his native place, for he 
is destined to become the murderer of his father and the hus- 
band of his mother. On the road leading away from his supposed 
home he meets King Laius, and in a sudden quarrel strikes him 
dead. He comes to Thebes, where he solves the riddle of the 
Sphinx, who is barring the way to the city, whereupon he is 
elected king by the grateful Thebans, and is rewarded with the 
hand of Jocasta. He reigns for many years in peace and honour, 
and begets two sons and two daughters upon his unknown 
mother, until at last a plague breaks out — which causes the 
Thebans to consult the oracle anew. Here Sophocles’ tragedy 
begins. The messengers bring the reply that the plague will stop 
as soon as the murderer of Laius is driven from the country. But 
where is he? 


“Where shall be found, 

Faint, and hard to be known, the trace of the ancient guilt?” 

The action of the play consists simply in the disclosure, ap- 
proached step by step and artistically delayed (and comparable 
to the work of a psychoanalysis) that Oedipus himself is the 
murderer of Laius, and that he is the son of the murdered man 
and Jocasta. Shocked by the abominable crime which he has 
unwittingly committed, Oedipus blinds himself, and departs 
from his native city. The prophecy of the oracle has been ful- 
filled. 

The Oedipus Rex is a tragedy of fate; its tragic effect de- 
pends on the conflict between the all-powerful will of the gods 
and the vain efforts of human beings threatened with disaster; 
resignation to the divine will, and the perception of one’s own 
impotence is the lesson which the deeply moved spectator is 
supposed to learn from the tragedy. Modern au th ors have there- 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS l6l 

fore sought to achieve a similar tragic effect by expressing the 
same conflict in stories of their own invention. But the play- 
goers have looked on unmoved at the unavailing efforts of guilt- 
less men to avert the fulfilment of curse or oracle; the modern 
tragedies of destiny have failed of their effect. 

If the Oedipus Rex is capable of moving a modem reader or 
playgoer no less powerfully than it moved the contemporary 
Greeks, the only possible explanation is that the effect of the 
Greek tragedy does not depend upon the conflict between fate 
and human will, but upon the peculiar nature of the material by 
which this conflict is revealed. There must be a voice within us 
which is prepared to acknowledge the compelling power of fate 
in the Oedipus, while we are able to condemn the situations oc- 
curring in Die Aknfrau or other tragedies of fate as arbitrary 
inventions. And there actually is a motive in the story of King 
Oedipus which explains the verdict of this inner voice. His fate 
moves us only because it might have been our own, because the 
oracle laid upon us before our birth the very curse which rested 
upon him. It may be that we were all destined to direct our first 
sexual impulses toward our mothers, and our first impulses of 
hatred and violence toward our fathers; our dreams convince us 
that we were. King Oedipus, who slew his father Laius and 
wedded his mother Jocasta, is nothing more or less than a wish- 
fulfilment — the fulfilment of the wish of our childhood. But we, 
more fortunate than he, in so far as we have not become psycho- 
neurotics, have since our childhood succeeded in withdrawing 
our sexual impulses from our mothers, and in forgetting our 
jealousy of our fathers. We recoil from the person for whom this 
primitive wish of our childhood has been fulfilled with all the 
force of the repression which these wishes have undergone in 
our minds since childhood. As the poet brings the guilt of 
Oedipus to light by his investigation, he forces us to become 
aware of our own inner selves, in which the same impulses are 
still extant, even though they are suppressed. The antithesis 
with which the chorus departs: — 

. . Behold, this is Oedipus, 

Who unravelled the great riddle, and was first in power, 

Whose fortune all the townsmen praised and envied; 

See in what dread adversity he sank!” 



1 62 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

— this admonition touches us and our own pride, us who since 
the years of our childhood have grown so wise and so powerful 
in our own estimation. Like Oedipus, we live in ignorance of the 
desires that offend morality, the desires that nature has forced 
upon us and after their unveiling we may well prefer to avert our 
gaze from the scenes of our childhood . 51 

In the very text of Sophocles’ tragedy there is an unmistak- 
able reference to the fact that the Oedipus legend had its source 
in dream-material of immemorial antiquity, the content of which 
was the painful disturbance of the child’s relations to its parents 
caused by the first impulses of sexuality. Jocasta comforts Oedi- 
pus — who is not yet enlightened, but is troubled by the recollec- 
tion of the oracle — by an allusion to a dream which is often 
dreamed, though it cannot, in her opinion, mean anything: — 

“For many a man hath seen himself in dreams 
His mother’s mate, but he who gives no heed 
To suchlike matters bears the easier life.” 

The dream of having sexual intercourse with one’s mother was 
as common then as it is to-day with many people, who tell it 
with indignation and astonishment. As may well be imagined, it 
is the key to the tragedy and the complement to the dream of the 
death of the father. The Oedipus fable is the reaction of phantasy 
to these two typical dreams, and just as such a dream, when 
occurring to an adult, is experienced with feelings of aversion, 
so the content of the fable must include terror and self-chastise- 
ment. The form which it subsequently assumed was the result 
of an uncomprehending secondary elaboration of the material, 

51 None of the discoveries of psychoanalytical research has evoked such 
embittered contradiction, such furious opposition, and also such entertain- 
ing acrobatics of criticism, as this indication of the incestuous impulses of 
childhood which survive in the unconscious. An attempt has even been 
made recently, in defiance of all experience, to assign only a “symbolic’* 
significance to incest. Ferenczi has given an ingenious reinterpretation of 
the Oedipus myth, based on a passage in one of Schopenhauer’s letters, in 
Imago , i, 1912. The “Oedipus complex,” which was first alluded to here in 
The Interpretation of Dreams, has through further study of the subject, 
acquired an unexpected significance for the understanding of human his tory 
and the evolution of religion and morality. See Totem und Taboo . 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 1 63 

which sought to make it serve a theological intention . 52 The at- 
tempt to reconcile divine omnipotence with human responsibility 
must, of course, fail with this material as with any other. 

Another of the great poetic tragedies, Shakespeare’s Hamlet, 
is rooted in the same soil as Oedipus Rex. But the whole differ- 
ence in the psychic life of the two widely separated periods of 
civilization, and the progress, during the course of time, of re- 
pression in the emotional life of humanity, is manifested in the 
differing treatment of the same material. In Oedipus Rex the 
basic wish-phantasy of the child is brought to light and realized 
as it is in dreams; in Hamlet it remains repressed, and we learn 
of its existence — as we discover the relevant facts in a neurosis — - 
only through the inhibitory effects which proceed from it. In the 
more modern drama, the curious fact that it is possible to remain 
in complete uncertainty as to the character of the hero has 
proved to be quite consistent with the overpowering effect of the 
tragedy. The play is based upon Hamlet’s hesitation in accom- 
plishing the task of revenge assigned to him; the text does not 
give the cause or the motive of this hesitation, nor have the 
manifold attempts at interpretation succeeded in doing so. Ac- 
cording to the still prevailing conception, a conception for which 
Goethe was first responsible, Hamlet represents the type of man 
whose active energy is paralysed by excessive intellectual activ- 
ity: “Sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought.” According to 
another conception, the poet has endeavoured to portray a 
morbid, irresolute character, on the verge of neurasthenia. The 
plot of the drama, however, shows us that Hamlet is by no means 
intended to appear as a character wholly incapable of action. On 
two separate occasions we see him assert himself: once in a 
sudden outburst of rage, when he stabs the eavesdropper behind 
the arras, and on the other occasion when he deliberately, and 
even craftily, with the complete unscrupulousness of a prince of 
the Renaissance, sends the two courtiers to the death which was 
intended for himself. What is it, then, that inhibits him in ac- 
complishing the task which his father’s ghost has laid upon him? 
Here the explanation offers itself that it is the peculiar nature of 
this task. Hamlet is able to do anything but take vengeance 
62 Cf. the dream-material of exhibitionism, p. 141. 



1 64 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

upon the man who did away with his father and has taken his 
father’s place with his mother — the man who shows him in 
realization the repressed desires of his own childhood. The loath- 
ing which should have driven him to revenge is thus replaced 
by self-reproach, by conscientious scruples, which tell him that 
he himself is no better than the murderer whom he is required to 
punish. I have here translated into consciousness what had to 
remain unconscious in the mind of the hero ; if anyone wishes to 
call Hamlet an hysterical subject I cannot but admit that this 
is the deduction to be drawn from my interpretation. The sexual 
aversion which Hamlet expresses in conversation with Ophelia is 
perfectly consistent with this deduction — the same sexual aver- 
sion which during the next few years was increasingly to take 
possession of the poet’s soul, until it found its supreme utterance 
in Thnon of Athens . It can, of course, be only the poet’s own 
psychology with which we are confronted in Hamlet; and in a 
work on Shakespeare by Georg Brandes (1896) I find the state- 
ment that the drama was composed immediately after the death 
of Shakespeare’s father (1601) — that is to say, when he was still 
mourning his loss, and during a revival, as we may fairly assume, 
of his own childish feelings in respect of his father. It is known, 
too, that Shakespeare’s son, who died in childhood, bore the 
name of Hamnet (identical with Hamlet) . Just as Hamlet treats 
of the relation of the son to his parents, so Macbeth , which was 
written about the same period, is based upon the theme of 
childlessness. Just as all neurotic symptoms, like dreams them- 
selves, are capable of hyper- interpretation, and even require 
such hyper-interpretation before they become perfectly intelli- 
gible, so every genuine poetical creation must have proceeded 
from more than one motive, more than one impulse in the mind 
of the poet, and must admit of more than one interpretation. I 
have here attempted to interpret only the deepest stratum of 
impulses in the mind of the creative poet. 53 

68 These indications in the direction of an analytical understanding of 
Hamlet were subsequently developed by Dr. Ernest Jones, who defended 
the above conception against others which have been put forward in the lit- 
erature of the subject. {The Problem of Hamlet and the Oedipus Complex , 
1911). The relation of the material of Hamlet to the “myth of the birth of 
the hero” has been demonstrated by 0 . Rank. Further attempts at an 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 165 

With regard to typical dreams of the death of relatives, I 
must add a few words upon their significance from the point of 
view of the theory of dreams in general. These dreams show us 
the occurence of a very unusual state of things; they show us 
that the dream-thought created by the repressed wish com- 
pletely escapes the censorship, and is transferred to the dream 
without alteration. Special conditions must obtain in order to 
make this possible. The following two factors favour the pro- 
duction of these dreams: first, this is the last wish that we could 
credit ourselves with harbouring; we believe such a wish “would 
never occur to us even in a dream”; the dream-censorship is 
therefore unprepared for this monstrosity, just as the laws of 
Solon did not foresee the necessity of establishing a penalty for 
patricide. Secondly, the repressed and unsuspected wish is, in 
this special case, frequently met half-way by a residue from 
the day’s experience, in the form of some concern for the life of 
the beloved person. This anxiety cannot enter into the dream 
otherwise than by taking advantage of the corresponding wish; 
but the wish is able to mask itself behind the concern which has 
been aroused during the day. If one is inclined to think that all 
this is really a very much simpler process, and to imagine that 
one merely continues during the night, and in one’s dream, what 
was begun during the day, one removes the dreams of the death 
of those dear to us out of all connection with the general ex- 
planation of dreams, and a problem that may very well be 
solved remains a problem needlessly. 

It is instructive to trace the relation of these dreams to 
anxiety-dreams. In dreams of the death of those dear to us the 
repressed wish has found a way of avoiding the censorship — and 
the distortion for which the censorship is responsible. An in- 
variable concomitant phenomenon, then, is that painful emotions 
are felt in the dream. Similarly, an anxiety-dream occurs only 
when the censorship is entirely or partially overpowered, and 


analysis of Macbeth will be found in my essay on Einige Charaktertypen , 
aus der psychoanalytischen Arbeit, in Imago , iv, 1916 (Ges. Schriften, Bd. 
x), in L. Jekels’s Shakespeare’s Macbeth , in Imago , v. 1918; and in The 
Oedipus Complex as an Explanation of Hamlet’s Mystery: a Study in Mo- 
tive ( American Journal of Psychology, 1910. v 0 I. xxi) . 



l66 THS INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

on the other hand, the overpowering of the censorship is facili- 
tated when the actual sensation of anxiety is already present 
from somatic sources. It thus becomes obvious for what purpose 
the censorship performs its office and practices dream-distortion; 
it does so in order to prevent the development of anxiety or 
other forms of painful affect . 

I have spoken in the foregoing sections of the egoism of the 
child’s psyche, and I now emphasize this peculiarity in order to 
suggest a connection, for dreams too have retained this charac- 
teristic. All dreams are absolutely egoistical; in every dream the 
beloved ego appears, even though in a disguised form. The wishes 
that are realized in dreams are invariably the wishes of this ego; 
it is only a deceptive appearance if interest in another person 
is believed to have evoked a dream. I will now analyse a few 
examples which appear to contradict this assertion. 

I 

A boy not yet four years of age relates the following dream: 
He saw a large garnished dish, on which was a large joint of roast 
meat; and the joint was suddenly — not carved — but eaten up. 
He did not see the person who ate it , 54 
Who can he be, this strange person, of whose luxurious repast 
the little fellow dreams? The experience of the day must supply 
the answer. For some days past the boy, in accordance with the 
doctor’s orders, had been living on a milk diet; but on the eve- 
ning of the “dream-day” he had been naughty, and, as a punish- 
ment, had been deprived of his supper. He had already under- 
gone one such hunger-cure, and had borne his deprivation 

84 Even the large, over-abundant, immoderate and exaggerated things 
occurring in dreams may be a childish characteristic. A child wants noth- 
ing more intensely than to grow big, and to eat as much of everything as 
grown-ups do; a child is hard to satisfy; he knows no such word as 
“enough,” and insatiably demands the repetition of whatever has pleased 
him or tasted good to him. He learns to practise moderation, to be modest 
and resigned, only through training. As we know, the neurotic also is 
inclined to immoderation and excess. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 1 67 

bravely. He knew that he would get nothing, but he did not 
even allude to the fact that he was hungry. Training was begin- 
ning to produce its effect; this is demonstrated even by the 
dream, which reveals the beginnings of dream-distortion. There 
is no doubt that he himself is the person whose desires are 
directed toward this abundant meal, and a meal of roast meat 
at that. But since he knows that this is forbidden him, he does 
not dare, as hungry children do in dreams (cf. my little Anna’s 
dream about strawberries, p. 40), to sit down to the meal him- 
self. The person remains anonymous. 

II 

One night I dream that I see on a bookseller’s counter a new 
volume of one of those collectors’ series, which I am in the habit 
of buying (monographs on artistic subjects, history, famous 
artistic centres, etc.). The new collection is entitled “Famous 
Orators” {or Orations ), and the first number bears the name of 
Dr . Lecher. 

On analysis it seems to me improbable that the fame of Dr. 
Lecher, the long-winded speaker of the German Opposition, 
should occupy my thoughts while I am dreaming. The fact is 
that a few days ago I undertook the psychological treatment of 
some new patients, and am now forced to talk for ten to twelve 
hours a day. Thus I myself am a long-winded speaker. 

III 

On another occasion I dream that a university lecturer of my 
acquaintance says to me: “My son , the myopic” Then follows 
a dialogue of brief observations and replies. A third portion of 
the dream follows, in which I and my sons appear, and so far as 
the latent dream-content is concerned, the father, the son, and 
Professor M., are merely lay figures, representing myself and 
my eldest son. Later on I shall examine this dream again, on 
account of another peculiarity. 



1 68 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


IV 

The following dream gives an example of really base, egoistical 
feelings, which conceal themselves behind an affectionate con- 
cern: 

My friend Otto looks Ul; his face is brown and his eyes pro - 
trude. 

Otto is my family physician, to whom I owe a debt greater 
than I can ever hope to repay, since he has watched for years 
over the health of my children, has treated them successfully 
when they have been ill, and, moreover, has given them presents 
whenever he could find any excuse for doing so. He paid us a 
visit on the day of the dream, and my wife noticed that he 
looked tired and exhausted. At night I dream of him, and my 
dream attributes to him certain of the symptoms of Basedow’s 
disease. If you were to disregard my rules for dream-interpreta- 
tion you would understand this dream to mean that I am con- 
cerned about the health of my friend, and that this concern is 
realized in the dream. It would thus constitute a contradiction 
not only of the assertion that a dream is a wish-fulfilment, but 
also of the assertion that it is accessible only to egoistical im- 
pulses. But will those who thus interpret my dream explain why 
I should fear that Otto has Basedow’s disease, for which diag- 
nosis his appearance does not afford the slightest justification? 
My analysis, on the other hand, furnishes the following material, 
deriving from an incident which had occurred six years earlier. 
We were driving— a small party of us, including Professor R. — 
in the dark through the forest of N., which lies at a distance of 
some hours from where we were staying in the country. The 
driver, who was not quite sober, overthrew us and the carriage 
down a bank, and it was only by good fortune that we all es- 
caped unhurt. But we were forced to spend the night at the 
nearest inn, where the news of our mishap aroused great sym- 
pathy. A certain gentleman, who showed unmistakable symp- 
toms of morbus Basedowii — the brownish colour of the skin of 
the face and the protruding eyes, but no goitre— placed himself 
entirely at our disposal, and asked what he could do for us. 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OP DREAMS 1 69 

Professor R. answered in his decisive way, “Nothing, except lend 
me a nightshirt.” Whereupon our generous friend replied: “I 
am sorry, but I cannot do that,” and left us. 

In continuing the analysis, it occurs to me that Basedow is 
the name not only of a physician, but also of a famous pedagogue. 
(Now that I am wide awake, I do not feel quite sure of this 
fact.) My friend Otto is the person whom I have asked to take 
charge of the physical education of my children — especially 
during the age of puberty (hence the nightshirt) in case anything 
should happen to me. By seeing Otto in my dream with the 
morbid symptoms of our above-mentioned generous helper, I 
dearly mean to say: “If anything happens to me, he will do just 
as little for my children as Baron L. did for us, in spite of his 
amiable offers.” The egoistical flavour of this dream should now 
be obvious enough . 55 

But where is the wish-fulfilment to be found in this? Not in 
the vengeance wreaked on my friend Otto (who seems to be fated 
to be badly treated in my dreams) , but in the following circum- 
stance: Inasmuch as in my dream I represented Otto as Baron 
L., I likewise identified myself with another person, namely, 
with Professor R.; for I have asked something of Otto, just as 
R. asked something of Baron L. at the time of the incident I 
have described. And this is the point. For Professor R. has gone 
his way independently, outside academic circles, just as I myself 
have done, and has only in his later years received the title 

55 While Dr. Ernest Jones was delivering a lecture before an American 
scientific society, and was speaking of egoism in dreams, a learned lady 
took exception to this unscientific generalization. She thought the lecturer 
was entitled to pronounce such a verdict only on the dreams of Austrians, 
but had no right to include the dreams of Americans. As for herself, she 
was sure that all her dreams were strictly altruistic. 

In justice to this lady with her national pride it may, however, be re- 
marked that the dogma: “the dream is wholly egoistic” must not be mis- 
understood. For inasmuch as everything that occurs in preconscious think- 
ing may appear in dreams (in the content as well as the latent dream- 
thoughts) the altruistic feelings may possibly occur. Similarly, affectionate 
or amorous feelings for another person, if they exist in the unconscious, may 
occur in dreams. The truth of the assertion is therefore restricted to the 
fact that among the unconscious stimuli of dreams one very often finds 
egoistical tendencies which seem to have been overcome in the waking state. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


170 

which he had earned long before. Once more, then, I want to be 
a professor 1 The very phrase “in his later years” is a wish- 
fulfilment, for it means that I shall live long enough to steer my 
boys through the age of puberty myself. 


Of other typical dreams, in which one flies with a feeling of ease 
or falls in terror, I know nothing from my own experience, and 
whatever I have to say about them I owe to my psychoanalyses. 
From the information thus obtained one must conclude that 
these dreams also reproduce impressions made in childhood — 
that is, that they refer to the games involving rapid motion 
which have such an extraordinary attraction for children. Where 
is the uncle who has never made a child fly by running with it 
across the room with outstretched arms, or has never played at 
falling with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly 
straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and suddenly 
pretending to withdraw his supporting hand? At such moments 
children shout with joy, and insatiably demand a repetition of 
the performance, especially if a little fright and dizziness are 
involved in the game; in after years they repeat their sensations 
in dreams, but in dreams they omit the hands that held them, so 
that now they are free to float or fall. We know that all small 
children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see- 
sawing; and if they see gymnastic performances at the circus 
their recollection of such games is refreshed. 58 In some boys a 
hysterical attack will consist simply in the reproduction of such 
performances, which they accomplish with great dexterity. Not 
infrequently sexual sensations are excited by these games of 
movement, which are quite neutral in themselves. 57 To express 


Psychoanalytic investigation has enabled ns to conclude that in the pre- 
dilection shown by children for gymnastic performances, and in the repeti- 
tion of these in hysterical attacks, there is, besides the pleasure felt in the 
organ, yet another factor at work (often unconscious) : namely, a memory- 
picture of sexual intercourse observed in human beings or animals. 

A young coUeague, who is entirely free from nervousness, tells me, in this 
connection: I know from my own experience that while swinging, and at 
the moment at which the downward movement was at its j use d 

to have a curious feeling in my genitals, which, although it was not really 
pleasing to me, I must describe as a voluptuous feeling.” I have often heard 


THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 17I 

the matter in a few words: the “exciting” games of childhood are 
repeated in dreams of flying, falling, reeling and the like, but the 
voluptuous feelings are now transformed into anxiety. But, as 
every mother knows, the excited play of children often enough 
culminates in quarrelling and tears. 

I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that 
it is the state of our dermal sensations during sleep, the sensation 
of the movements of the lungs, etc., that evokes dreams of flying 
and falling. I see that these very sensations have been repro- 
duced from the memory to which the dream refers — and that 
they are, therefore, dream-content and not dream-sources. 

I do not for a moment deny, however, that I am unable to 
furnish a full explanation of this series of typical dreams. Pre- 
cisely here my material leaves me in the lurch. I must adhere to 
the general opinion that all the dermal and kinetic sensations of 
these typical dreams are awakened as soon as any psychic mo- 
tive of whatever kind has need of them, and that they are neglect- 
ed when there is no such need of them. The relation to infantile 
experiences seems to be confirmed by the indications which I 
have obtained from the analyses of psychoneurotics. But I am 
unable to say what other meanings might, in the course of the 
dreamer’s life, have become attached to the memory of these 
sensations — different, perhaps, in each individual, despite the 
typical appearance of these dreams — and I should very much 
like to be in a position to fill this gap with careful analyses of 
good examples. To those who wonder why I complain of a lack 
of material, despite the frequency of these dreams of flying, fall- 
ing, tooth-drawing, etc., I must explain that I myself have never 
experienced any such dreams since I have turned my attention 
to the subject of dream-interpretation. The dreams of neurotics 
which are at my disposal, however, are not all capable of inter- 
pretation, and very often it is impossible to penetrate to the 
farthest point of their hidden intention; a certain psychic force 

from patients that the first erections with voluptuous sensations which they 
can remember to have had in boyhood occurred while they were climbing. 
It is established with complete certainty by psychoanalysis that the first 
sexual sensations often have their origin in the scufflings and wrestlings of 
childhood. 



172 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

which participated in the building up of the neurosis, and which 
again becomes active during its dissolution, opposes interpreta- 
tion of the final problem. 

( c ) The Examination-Dream 

Everyone who has received his certificate of matriculation after 
passing his final examination at school complains of the per- 
sistence with which he is plagued by anxiety-dreams in which he 
has failed, or must go through his course again, etc. For the 
holder of a university degree this typical dream is replaced by 
another, which represents that he has not taken his doctor’s de- 
gree, to which he vainly objects, while still asleep, that he has 
already been practising for years, or is already a university lec- 
turer or the senior partner of a firm of lawyers, and so on. These 
are the ineradicable memories of the punishments we suffered as 
childen for misdeeds which we had committed — memories which 
were revived in us on the dies irae, dies ilia of the gruelling exam- 
ination at the two critical junctures in our careers as students. 
The “examination-anxiety” of neurotics is likewise intensified 
by this childish fear. When our student days are over it is no 
longer our parents or teachers who see to our punishment; the 
inexorable chain of cause and effect of later life has taken over 
our further education. Now we dream of our matriculation, or 
the examination for the doctor’s degree — and who has not been 
faint-hearted on such occasions? — whenever we fear that we 
may be punished by some unpleasant result because we have 
done something carelessly or wrongly, because we have not been 
as thorough as we might have been— in short, whenever we feel 
the burden of responsibility. 

For a further explanation of examination-dreams I have to 
thank a remark made by a colleague who had studied this sub- 
ject, who. once stated, in the course of a scientific discussion, 
that in his experience the examination-dream occurred only to 
persons who had passed the examination, never to those who 
had “flunked.” We have had increasing confirmation of the fact 
that the anxiety-dream of examination occurs when the dreamer 
is anticipating a responsible task on the following day, with the 



THE MATERIAL AND SOURCES OF DREAMS 1 73 

possibility of disgrace; recourse will then be had to an occasion 
in the past on which a great anxiety proved to have been without 
real justification, having, indeed, been refuted by the outcome. 
Such a dream would be a very striking example of the way in 
which the dream-content is misunderstood by the waking in- 
stance. The exclamation which is regarded as a protest against 
the dream: “But I am already a doctor,” etc., would in reality 
be the consolation offered by the dream, and should, therefore, 
be worded as follows: “Do not be afraid of the morrow; think 
of the anxiety which you felt before your matriculation; yet 
nothing happened to justify it, for now you are a doctor,” etc. 
But the anxiety which we attribute to the dream really has its 
origin in the residues of the dream-day. 

The tests of this interpretation which I have been able to make 
in my own case, and in that of others, although by no means 
exhaustive, were entirely in its favour . 58 For example, I failed in 
my examination for the doctor’s degree in medical jurisprudence ; 
never once has the matter worried me in my dreams, while I 
have often enough been examined in botany, zoology, and chem- 
istry, and I sat for the examinations in these subjects with well- 
justified anxiety, but escaped disaster, through the clemency of 
fate, or of the examiner. In my dreams of school examinations 
I am always examined in history, a subject in which I passed 
brilliantly at the time, but only, I must admit, because my good- 
natured professor — my one-eyed benefactor in another dream — 
did not overlook the fact that on the examination-paper which 
I returned to him I had crossed out with my fingernail the second 
of three questions, as a hint that he should not insist on it. One 
of my patients, who withdrew before the matriculation examina- 
tion, only to pass it later, but failed in the officer’s examination, 
so that he did not become an officer, tells me that he often dreams 
of the former examination, but never of the latter. 

W. Stekel, who was the first to interpret the “matriculation 
dream,” maintains that this dream invariably refers to sexual 
experiences and sexual maturity. This has frequently been con- 
firmed in my experience. 

58 See also pp. 193-S. 



VI 


THE DREAM-WORK 


All other previous attempts to solve the problems of dreams 
have concerned themselves directly with the manifest dream- 
content as it is retained in the memory. They have sought to 
obtain an interpretation of the dream from this content, or, if 
they dispensed with an interpretation, to base their conclusions 
concerning the dream on the evidence provided by this content. 
We, however, are confronted by a different set of data; for us a 
new psychic material interposes itself between the dream-content 
and the results of our investigations: the latent dream-content, 
or dream-thoughts, which are obtained only by our method. We 
develop the solution of the dream from this latent content, and 
not from the manifest dream-content. We are thus confronted 
with a new problem, an entirely novel task — that of examining 
and tracing the relations between the latent dream-thoughts and 
the manifest dream-content, and the processes by which the 
latter has grown out of the former. 

The dream-thoughts and the dream-content present them- 
selves as two descriptions of the same content in two different 
languages; or, to put it more clearly, the dream-content appears 
to us as a translation of the dream-thoughts into another mode 
of expression, whose symbols and laws of composition we must 
learn by comparing the origin with the translation. The dream- 
thoughts we can understand without further trouble the moment 
we have ascertained them. The dream-content is, as it were, 
presented in hieroglyphics, whose symbols must be translated, 
one by one, into the language of the dream-thoughts. It would 

174 



THE DREAM- WORK. 


*7S 

of course be incorrect to attempt to read these symbols in ac- 
cordance with their values as pictures, instead of in accordance 
with their meaning as symbols. For instance, I have before me 
a picture-puzzle (rebus) — a house, upon whose roof there is a 
boat; then a single letter; then a running figure, whose head has 
been omitted, and so on. As a critic I might be tempted to judge 
this composition and its elements to be nonsensical. A boat is 
out of place on the roof of a house, and a headless man cannot 
run; the man, too, is larger than the house, and if the whole 
thing is meant to represent a landscape the single letters of the 
alphabet have no right in it, since they do not occur in nature. 
A correct judgment of the picture-puzzle is possible only if I 
make no such objections to the whole and its parts, and if, on 
the contrary, I take the trouble to replace each image by a syl- 
lable or word which it may represent by virtue of some allusion 
or relation. The words thus put together are no longer meaning- 
less, but might constitute the most beautiful and pregnant 
aphorism. Now a dream is such a picture-puzzle, and our pre- 
decessors in the art of dream-interpretation have made the mis- 
take of judging the rebus as an artistic composition. As such, of 
course, it appears nonsensical and worthless. 

A. CONDENSATION 

The first thing that becomes clear to the investigator when he 
compares the dream-content with the dream-thoughts is that a 
tremendous work of condensation has been accomplished. The 
dream is meagre, paltry and laconic in comparison with the 
range and copiousness of the dream-thoughts. The dream, when 
written down, fills half a page; the analysis, which contains the 
dream-thoughts, requires six, eight, twelve times as much space. 
The ratio varies with different dreams; but in my experience it 
is always of the same order. As a rule, the extent of the compres- 
sion which has been accomplished is under-estimated, owing to 
the fact that the dream-thoughts which have been brought to 
light are believed to be the whole of the material, whereas a 
continuation of the work of interpretation would reveal still fur- 
ther thoughts hidden in the dream. We have already found it 



176 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

necessary to remark that one can never be really sure that one 
has interpreted a dream completely; even if the solution seems 
satisfying and flawless, it is always possible that yet another 
meaning has been manifested by the same dream. Thus the 
degree of condensation is — strictly speaking — indeterminable. 
Exception may be taken — and at first sight the objection seems 
perfectly plausible — to the assertion that the disproportion be- 
tween dream-content and dream-thoughts justifies the conclu- 
sion that a considerable condensation of psychic material occurs 
in the formation of dreams. For we often have the feeling that we 
have been dreaming a great deal all night, and have then for- 
gotten most of what we have dreamed. The dream which we 
remember on waking would thus appear to be merely a remnant 
of the total dream-work, which would surely equal the dream- 
thoughts in range if only we could remember it completely. To 
a certain extent this is undoubtedly true; there is no getting away 
from the fact that a dream is most accurately reproduced if we 
try to remember it immediately after waking, and that the recol- 
lection of it becomes more and more defective as the day goes 
on. On the other hand, it has to be recognized that the impression 
that we have dreamed a good deal more than we are able to 
reproduce is very often based on an illusion, the origin of which 
we shall explain later on. Moreover, the assumption of a con- 
densation in the dream-work is not affected by the possibility of 
forgetting a part of dreams, for it may be demonstrated by the 
multitude of ideas pertaining to those individual parts of the 
dream which do remain in the memory. If a large part of the 
dream has really escaped the memory, we are probably deprived 
of access to a new series of dream-thoughts. We have no justifi- 
cation for expecting that those portions of the dream which have 
been lost should likewise have referred only to those thoughts 
which we know from the analysis of the portions which have been 
preserved . 1 

1 References to the condensation in dreams are to be found in the works of 
many writers on the subject. Du Prel states in his Philosophic der Mystik 
that he is absolutely certain that a condensation-process of the succession 
of ideas had occurred. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


177 

In view of the very great number of ideas which analysis elicits 
for each individual element of the dream-content, the principal 
doubt in the minds of many readers will be whether it is permis- 
sible to count everything that subsequently occurs to the mind 
during analysis as forming part of the dream-thoughts — in other 
words, to assume that all these thoughts have been active in the 
sleeping state, and have taken part in the formation of the dream. 
Is it not more probable that new combinations of thoughts are 
developed in the course of analysis, which did not participate in 
the formation of the dream? To this objection I can give only a 
conditional reply. It is true, of course, that separate combina- 
tions of thoughts make their first appearance during the analysis ; 
but one can convince oneself every time this happens that such 
new combinations have been established only between thoughts 
which have already been connected in other ways in the dream- 
thoughts; the new combinations are, so to speak, corollaries, 
short-circuits, which are made possible by the existence of other, 
more fundamental modes of connection. In respect of the great 
majority of the groups of thoughts revealed by analysis, we are 
obliged to admit that they have already been active in the for- 
mation of the dream, for if we work through a succession of such 
thoughts, which at first sight seem to have played no part in the 
formation of the dream, we suddenly come upon a thought which 
occurs in the dream-content, and is indispensable to its interpre- 
tation, but which is nevertheless inaccessible except through this 
chain of thoughts. The reader may here turn to the dream of the 
botanical monograph, which is obviously the result of an aston- 
ishing degree of condensation, even though I have not given the 
complete analysis. 

But how, then, are we to imagine the psychic condition of the 
sleeper which precedes dreaming? Do all the dream-thoughts 
exist side by side, or do they pursue one another, or are there 
'several simultaneous trains of thought, proceeding from different 
centres, which subsequently meet? I do not think it is necessary 
at this point to form a plastic conception of the psychic condi- 
tion at the time of dream-formation. But let us not forget that 
we are concerned with unconscious thinking, and that the 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


178 

process may easily be different from that which we observe in 
ourselves in deliberate contemplation accompanied by conscious- 
ness. 

The fact, however, is irrefutable that dream-formation is based 
on a process of condensation. How, then, is this condensation 
effected? 

Now, if we consider that of the dream-thoughts ascertained 
only the most restricted number are represented in the dream by 
means of one of their conceptual elements, we might conclude 
that the condensation is accomplished by means of omission, in- 
asmuch as the dream is not a faithful translation or projection, 
point by point, of the dream-thoughts, but a very incomplete 
and defective reproduction of them. This view, as we shall soon 
perceive, is a very inadequate one. But for the present let us take 
it as a point of departure, and ask ourselves: If only a few of 
the elements of the dream-thoughts make their way into the 
dream-content, what are the conditions that determine their 
selection? 

In order to solve this problem, let us turn our attention to 
those elements of the dream-content which must have fulfilled 
the conditions for which we are looking. The most suitable ma- 
terial for this investigation will be a dream to whose formation 
a particularly intense condensation has contributed. I select the 
dream, cited on page 73 ff., of the botanical monograph. 

I 

Dream-content: / have written a monograph upon a certain (in- 
determinate) species of plant . The book lies before me, I am just 
turning over a folded coloured plate. A dried specimen of the 
plant is bound up in this copy , as in a herbarium . 

The most prominent element of this dream is the botanical 
monograph . This is derived from the impressions of the dream- 
day; I had actually seen a monograph on the genus Cyclamen 
in a bookseller’s window. The mention of this genus is lacking in 
the dream-content; only the monograph and its relation to 
botany have remained. The “botanical monograph” immediately 
reveals its relation to the work on cocaine which I once wrote; 



THE DREAM-WORK 


179 

from cocaine the train of thought proceeds on the one hand to a 
Festschrift , and on the other to my friend, the oculist, Dr. 
Koenigstein, who was partly responsible for the introduction of 
cocaine as a local anaesthetic. Moreover, Dr. Koenigstein is con- 
nected with the recollection of an interrupted conversation I had 
had with him on the previous evening, and with all sorts of ideas 
relating to the remuneration of medical and surgical services 
among colleagues. This conversation, then, is the actual dream- 
stimulus; the monograph on cyclamen is also a real incident, but 
one of an indifferent nature; as I now see, the “botanical mono- 
graph” of the dream proves to be a common mean between the 
two experiences of the day, taken over unchanged from an indif- 
ferent impression, and bound up with the psychically significant 
experience by means of the most copious associations. 

Not only the combined idea of the botanical monograph , how- 
ever, but also each of its separate elements, “ botanical ” and 
“monograph” penetrates farther and farther, by manifold asso- 
ciations, into the confused tangle of the dream-thoughts. To 
botanical belong the recollections of the person of Professor 
Gartner (German: Gartner = gardener), of his blooming wife, 
of my patient, whose name is Flora , and of a lady concerning 
whom I told the story of the forgotten flowers . Gartner , again, 
leads me to the laboratory and the conversation with Koenig- 
stein; and the allusion to the two female patients belongs to the 
same conversation. From the lady with the flowers a train of 
thoughts branches off to the favourite flowers of my wife, whose 
other branch leads to the title of the hastily seen monograph. 
Further, botanical recalls an episode at the “Gymnasium,” and a 
university examination; and a fresh subject — that of my hobbies 
— which was broached in the above-mentioned conversation, is 
linked up, by means of what is humorously called my favourite 
flower , the artichoke, with the train of thoughts proceeding from 
the forgotten flowers; behind “artichoke” there lies, on the one 
hand, a recollection of Italy, and on the other a reminiscence of a 
scene of my childhood, in which I first formed an acquaintance — 
which has since then grown so intimate — with books. Botanical, 
then, is a veritable nucleus, and, for the dream, the meeting-point 
of many trains of thought; which, I can testify, had all really 



l80 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

been brought into connection by the conversation referred to. 
Here we find ourselves in a thought-factory, in which, as in The 
Weaver’s Masterpiece : — 

“The little shuttles to and fro 

Fly, and the threads unnoted flow; 

One throw links up a thousand threads.” 

Monograph in the dream, again, touches two themes: the one- 
sided nature of my studies, and the costliness of my hobbies. 

The impression derived from this first investigation is that 
the elements “botanical” and “monograph” were taken up into 
the dream-content because they were able to offer the most 
numerous points of contact with the greatest number of dream- 
thoughts, and thus represented nodal points at which a great 
number of the dream-thoughts met together, and because they 
were of manifold significance in respect of the meaning of the 
dream. The fact upon which this explanation is based may be 
expressed in another form: Every element of the dream-content 
proves to be over-determined — that is, it appears several times 
over in the dream-thoughts. 

We shall learn more if we examine the other components of 
the dream in respect of their occurrence in the dream-thoughts. 
The coloured plate refers (cf. the analysis on p. 74) to a new 
subject, the criticism passed upon my work by colleagues, and 
also to a subject already represented in the dream — my hobbies 
— and, further, to a memory of my childhood, in which I pull to 
pieces a book with coloured plates; the dried specimen of the 
plant relates to my experience with the herbarium at the “Gym- 
nasium,” and gives this memory particular emphasis. Thus I 
perceive the nature of the relation between the dream-content 
and dream-thoughts: Not only are the elements of the dream 
determined several times over by the dream-thoughts, but the 
individual dream-thoughts are represented in the dream by sev- 
eral elements. Starting from an element of the dream, the path 
of the association leads to a number of dream-thoughts; and 
from a single dream-thought to several elements of the dream. 
In the process of dream-formation, therefore, it is not the case 
that a single dream-thought, or a group of dream- thoughts, sup- 



THE DREAM-WORK 


181 

plies the dream-content with an abbreviation of itself as its rep- 
resentative, and that the next dream-thought supplies another 
abbreviation as its representative (much as representatives are 
elected from among the population) ; but rather that the whole 
mass of the dream-thoughts is subjected to a certain elaboration, 
in the course of which those elements that receive the strongest 
and completest support stand out in relief; so that the process 
might perhaps be likened to election by the scrutin du liste. 
Whatever dream I may subject to such a dissection, I always 
find the same fundamental principle confirmed — that the dream- 
elements have been formed out of the whole mass of the dream- 
thoughts, and that every one of them appears, in relation to the 
dream-thoughts, to have a multiple determination. 

It is certainly not superfluous to demonstrate this relation of 
the dream-content to the dream-thoughts by means of a further 
example, which is distinguished by a particularly artful inter- 
twining of reciprocal relations. The dream is that of a patient 
whom I am treating for claustrophobia (fear of enclosed spaces). 
It will soon become evident why I feel myself called upon to 
entitle this exceptionally clever piece of dream-activity: 

II. “A Beautiful Dream” 

The dreamer is driving with a great number of companions in 
X-street, where there is a modest hostelry (which is not the 
case). A theatrical performance is being given in one of the 
rooms of the inn . He is first spectator, then actor . Finally the 
company are told to change their clothes, in order to return to 
the city . Some of the company are shown into rooms on the 
ground floor, others to rooms on the first floor . Then a dispute 
arises . The people upstairs are annoyed because those downstairs 
have not yet finished changing , so that they cannot come down . 
His brother is upstairs; he is downstairs; and he is angry with 
his brother because they are so hurried. (This part obscure.) 
Besides, it was already decided, upon their arrival, who was to 
go upstairs and who down . Then he goes alone up the hill towards 
the city, and he walks so heavily, and with such difficulty, that 
he cannot move from the spot . An elderly gentleman joins him 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


182 

and talks angrily of the King of Italy . Finally , towards the top 
of the hill , he is able to walk muck more easily. 

The difficulty experienced in climbing the hill was so distinct 
that for some time after waking he was in doubt whether the 
experience was a dream or the reality. 

Judged by the manifest content, this dream can hardly be 
eulogized. Contrary to the rules, I shall begin the interpretation 
with that portion to which the dreamer referred as being the 
most distinct. 

The difficulty dreamed of, and probably experienced during 
the dream — difficulty in climbing, accompanied by dyspnoea — 
was one of the symptoms which the patient had actually ex- 
hibited some years before, and which, in conjunction with other 
symptoms, was at the time attributed to tuberculosis (probably 
hysterically simulated). From our study of exhibition-dreams 
we are already acquainted with this sensation of being inhibited 
in motion, peculiar to dreams, and here again we find it utilized 
as material always available for the purposes of any other kind 
of representation. The part of the dream-content which repre- 
sents climbing as difficult at first, and easier at the top of the 
hill, made me think, while it was being related, of the well-known 
masterly introduction to Daudet’s Sappho. Here a young man 
carries the woman he loves upstairs; she is at first as light as a 
feather, but the higher he climbs the more she weighs; and this 
scene is symbolic of the progress of their relation, in describing 
which Daudet seeks to admonish young men not to lavish an 
earnest affection upon girls of humble origin and dubious ante- 
cedents . 2 Although I knew that my patient had recently had a 
love-affair with an actress, and had broken it off, I hardly ex- 
pected to find that the inteipretation which had occurred to me 
was correct. The situation in Sappho is actually the reverse of 
that in the dream; for in the dream climbing was difficult at the 
first and easy later on ; in the novel the symbolism is pertinent 
only if what was at first easily carried finally proves to be a 
heavy burden. To my astonishment, the patient remarked that 
the interpretation fitted in very well with the plot of a play 

2 In estimating the significance of this passage we may recall the meaning 
of dreams of climbing stairs, as explained in the chapter on Symbolism. 




THE DEE AM- WORK 


183 

which he had seen the previous evening. The play was called 
Rund um Wien (“Round about Vienna”), and treated of the 
career of a girl who was at first respectable, but who subsequently 
lapsed into the demi-monde , and formed relations with highly- 
placed lovers, thereby climbing, but finally she went downhill 
faster and faster. This play reminded him of another, entitled 
Von Stufe zu Stuje (“From Step to Step”), the poster advertis- 
ing which had depicted a flight 0} stairs . 

To continue the interpretation: The actress with whom he 
had had his most recent and complicated affair had lived in X- 
street. There is no inn in this street. However, while he was 
spending part of the summer in Vienna for the sake of this lady, 
he had lodged (German: abgestiegen = stopped, literally 
stepped off) at a small hotel in the neighbourhood. When he was 
leaving the hotel, he said to the cab-driver: “I am glad at all 
events that I didn't get any vermin herel” (Incidentally, the 
dread of vermin is one of his phobias.) Whereupon the cab- 
driver answered: “How could anybody stop there! That isn't a 
hotel at all, it's really nothing but a pub l” 

The “pub” immediately reminded him of a quotation: 

“Of a wonderful host 
I was lately a guest.” 

But the host in the poem by Uhland is an apple-tree . Now a 
second quotation continues the train of thought: 

Faust: {dancing with the young witch ) . 

“A lovely dream once came to me; 

I then beheld an apple-tree, 

And there two fairest apples shone: 

They lured me so, I climbed thereon” 

The Fair One: 

“Apples have been desired by you, 

Since first in Paradise they grew; 

And I am moved with joy to know 
That such within my garden grow.” 3 

* Translated by Bayard Taylor. 


X S4 T H E INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

There is not the slightest doubt what is meant by the apple-tree 
and the apples. A beautiful bosom stood high among the charms 
by which the actress had bewitched our dreamer. 

Judging from the context of the analysis, we had every reason 
to assume that the dream referred to an impression of the 
dreamer's childhood. If this is correct, it must have referred to 
the wet-nurse of the dreamer, who is now a man of nearly thirty 
years of age. The bosom of the nurse is in reality an inn for the 
child. The nurse, as well as Daudet’s Sappho , appears as an 
allusion to his recently abandoned mistress. 

The (elder) brother of the patient also appears in the dream- 
content; he is upstairs , while the dreamer himself is downstairs . 
This again is an inversion, for the brother, as I happen to know, 
has lost his social position, while my patient has retained his. 
In relating the dream-content, the dreamer avoided saying that 
his brother was upstairs and that he himself was downstairs. This 
would have been too obvious an expression, for in Austria we 
say that a man is on the ground floor when he has lost his for- 
tune and social position, just as we say that he has come down. 
Now the fact that at this point in the dream something is repre- 
sented as inverted must have a meaning; and the inversion must 
apply to some other relation between the dream-thoughts and 
the dream-content. There is an indication which suggests how 
this inversion is to be understood. It obviously applies to the end 
of the dream, where the circumstances of climbing are the reverse 
of those described in Sappho . Now it is evident what inversion 
is meant: In Sappho the man carries the woman who stands in a 
sexual relation to him; in the dream-thoughts, conversely, there 
is a reference to a woman carrying a man; and, as this could 
occur only in childhood, the reference is once more to the nurse 
who carries the heavy child. Thus the final portion of the dream 
succeeds in representing Sappho and the nurse in the same 
allusion. 

Just as the name Sappho has not been selected by the poet 
without reference to a Lesbian practice, so the portions of the 
dream in which people are busy upstairs and downstairs , “above” 
and “beneath,” point to fancies of a sexual content with which 
the dreamer is occupied, and which, as suppressed cravings, are 


THE DREAM-WORK 


185 

not unconnected with his neurosis. Dream-interpretation itself 
does not show that these are fancies and not memories of actual 
happenings; it only furnishes us with a set of thoughts and 
leaves it to us to determine their actual value. In this case real 
and imagined happenings appear at first as of equal value — and 
not only here, but also in the creation of more important psychic 
structures than dreams. A large company, as we already know, 
signifies a secret. The brother is none other than a representative, 
drawn into the scenes of childhood by “fancying backwards,” 
of all of the subsequent rivals for women’s favours. Through the 
medium of an experience indifferent in itself, the episode of the 
gentleman who talks angrily of the King of Italy refers to the 
intrusion of people of low rank into aristocratic society. It is as 
though the warning which Daudet gives to young men were to 
be supplemented by a similar warning applicable to a suckling 
child. 4 

In the two dreams here cited I have shown by italics where 
one of the elements of the dream recurs in the dream-thoughts, 
in order to make the multiple relations of the former more obvi- 
ous. Since, however, the analysis of these dreams has not been 
carried to completion, it will probably be worth while to con- 
sider a dream with a full analysis, in order to demonstrate the 
manifold determination of the dream-content. For this purpose 
I shall select the dream of Irma’s injection (see p. 17). From 
this example we shall readily see that the condensation-work in 
the dream-formation has made use of more means than one. 

The chief person in the dream-content is my patient Irma, who 
is seen with the features which belong to her in waking life, and 
who therefore, in the first instance, represents herself. But her 
attitude, as I examine her at the window, is taken from a recol- 
lection of another person, of the lady for whom I should like to 
exchange my patient, as is shown by the dream-thoughts. Inas- 
much as Irma has a diphtheritic membrane, which recalls my 
4 The fantastic nature of the situation relating to the dreamer’s wet-nurse 
is shown by the circumstance, objectively ascertained, that the nurse in this 
case was his mother. Further, I may call attention to the regret of the young 
man in the anecdote related on p. 106 (that he had not taken better advan- 
tage of his opportunities with his wet-nurse) as the probable source of this 
dream. 



1 86 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


anxiety about my eldest daughter, she comes to represent this 
child of mine, behind whom, connected with her by the identity 
of their names, is concealed the person of the patient who died 
from the effects of poison. In the further course of the dream the 
significance of Irma’s personality changes (without the altera- 
tion of her image as it is seen in the dream) : she becomes one of 
the children whom we examine in the public dispensaries for 
children’s diseases, where my friends display the differences in 
their mental capacities. The transition was obviously effected by 
the idea of my little daughter. Owing to her unwillingness to 
open her mouth, the same Irma constitutes an allusion to an- 
other lady who was once examined by me, and, also in the same 
connection, to my wife. Further, in the morbid changes which I 
discover in her throat I have summarized allusions to quite a 
number of other persons. 

All these people whom I encounter as I follow up the associa- 
tions suggested by “Irma” do not appear personally in the 
dream; they are concealed behind the dream-person “Irma,” 
who is thus developed into a collective image, which, as might 
be expected, has contradictory features. Irma comes to represent 
these other persons, who are discarded in the work of condensa- 
tion, inasmuch as I allow anything to happen to her which re- 
minds me of these persons, trait by trait. 

For the purposes of dream-condensation I may construct a 
composite person in yet another fashion, by combining the actual 
features of two or more persons in a single dream-image. It is in 
this fashion that the Dr. M. of my dream was constructed; he 
bears the name of Dr. M., and he speaks and acts as Dr. M. 
does, but his bodily characteristics and his malady belong to 
another person, my eldest brother; a single feature, paleness, is 
doubly determined, owing to the fact that it is common to both 
persons. Dr. R., in my dream about my uncle, is a similar com- 
posite person. Rut here the dream-image is constructed in yet 
another fashion. I have not united features peculiar to the one 
person with the features of the other, thereby abridging by cer- 
tain features the memory-picture of each; but I have adopted 
the method employed by Galton in producing family portraits; 
namely, I have superimposed the two images, so that the com- 


THE DKEAM-WORK 


187 

mon features stand out in stronger relief, while those which do 
not coincide neutralize one another and become indistinct. In 
the dream of my uncle the fair beard stands out in relief, as an 
emphasized feature, from a physiognomy which belongs to two 
persons, and which is consequently blurred; further, in its refer- 
ence to growing grey the beard contains an allusion to my father 
and to myself. 

The construction of collective and composite persons is one of 
the principal methods of dream-condensation. We shall presently 
have occasion to deal with this in another connection. 

The notion of dysentery in the dream of Irma’s injection has 
likewise a multiple determination; on the one hand, because of 
its paraphasic assonance with diphtheria, and on the other be- 
cause of its reference to the patient whom I sent to the East, and 
whose hysteria had been wrongly diagnosed. 

The mention of propyls in the dream proves again to be an 
interesting case of condensation. Not propyls but amyls were 
included in the dream-thoughts. One might think that here a 
simple displacement had occurred in the course of dream-forma- 
tion. This is in fact the case, but the displacement serves the 
purposes of the condensation, as is shown from the following 
supplementary analysis: If I dwell for a moment upon the word 
propylen (German) its assonance with the word propylaeum 
suggests itself to me. But a propylaeum is to be found not only 
in Athens, but also in Munich. In the latter city, a year before 
my dream, I had visited a friend who was seriously ill, and the 
reference to him in trimethylamin , which follows closely upon 
propyls , is unmistakable. 

I pass over the striking circumstance that here, as elsewhere 
in the analysis of dreams, associations of the most widely differ- 
ing values are employed for making thought-connections as 
though they were equivalent, and I yield to the temptation to 
regard the procedure by which amyls in the dream-thoughts are 
replaced in the dream-content by propyls as a sort of plastic 
process. 

On the one hand, here is the group of ideas relating to my 
friend Otto, who does not understand me, thinks I am in the 
wrong, and gives me the liqueur that smells of amyls; on the 



1 88 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

other hand, there is the group of ideas — connected with the first 
by contrast — relating to my Berlin friend who does understand 
me, who would always think that I was right, and to whom I 
am indebted for so much valuable information concerning the 
chemistry of sexual processes. 

What elements in the Otto group are to attract my particular 
attention are determined by the recent circumstances which are 
responsible for the dream; amyls belong to the element so dis- 
tinguished, which are predestined to find their way into the 
dream-content. The large group of ideas centering upon William 
is actually stimulated by the contrast between William and Otto, 
and those elements in it are emphasized which are in tune with 
those already stirred up in the “Otto” group. In the whole of 
this dream I am continually recoiling from somebody who excites 
my displeasure towards another person with whom I can at will 
confront the first; trait by trait I appeal to the friend as against 
the enemy. Thus “amyls” in the Otto group awakes recollections 
in the other group, also belonging to the region of chemistry; 
“trimethylamin,” which receives support from several quarters, 
finds its way into the dream-content. “Amyls,” too, might have 
got into the dream-content unchanged, but it yields to the influ- 
ence of the “William” group, inasmuch as out of the whole range 
of recollections covered by this name an element is sought out 
which is able to furnish a double determination for “amyls.” 
“Propyls” is closely associated with “amyls”; from the “Wil- 
liam” group comes Munich with its propylaeum. Both groups 
are united in “propyls — propylaeum.” As though by a compro- 
mise, this intermediate element then makes its way into the 
dream-content. Here a common mean which permits of a mul- 
tiple determination has been created. It thus becomes palpable 
that a multiple determination must facilitate penetration into 
the dream-content. For the purpose of this mean-formation a 
displacement of the attention has been unhesitantingly effected 
from what is really intended to something adjacent to it in the 
associations. 

The study of the dream of Irma J s injection has now enabled 
us to obtain some insight into the process of condensation which 
occurs in the formation of dreams. We perceive, as peculiarities 


THE DREAM-WORK 


189 

of the condensing process, a selection of those elements which 
occur several times over in the dream-content, the formation of 
new unities (composite persons, mixed images), and the produc- 
tion of common means. The purpose which is served by conden- 
sation, and the means by which it is brought about, will be 
investigated when we come to study in all their bearings the psy- 
chic processes at work in the formation of dreams. Let us for the 
present be content with establishing the fact of dream-condensa- 
tion as a relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream- 
content which deserves attention. 

The condensation-work of dreams becomes most palpable 
when it takes words and means as its objects. Generally speaking, 
words are often treated in dreams as things, and therefore under- 
go the same combinations as the ideas of things. The results of 
such dreams are comical and bizarre word-formations. 

x. A colleague sent an essay of his, in which he had, in my 
opinion, overestimated the value of a recent physiological dis- 
covery, and had expressed himself, moreover, in extravagant 
terms. On the following night I dreamed a sentence which obvi- 
ously referred to this essay: “That is a truly norekdal style.” 
The solution of this word-formation at first gave me some diffi- 
culty; it was unquestionably formed as a parody of the super- 
latives “colossal,” “pyramidal”; but it was not easy to say 
where it came from. At last the monster fell apart into the two 
names Nora and Ekdal, from two well-known plays by Ibsen. I 
had previously read a newspaper article on Ibsen by the writer 
whose latest work I was now criticizing in my dream. 

2. One of my female patients dreams that a man with a fair 
beard and a peculiar glittering eye is pointing to a sign-board 
attached to a tree which reads : uclamparia — wet? 

Analysis. — The man was rather authoritative-looking, and 
his peculiar glittering eye at once recalled the church of San 
Paolo, near Rome, where she had seen the mosaic portraits of 
the Popes. One of the early Popes had a golden eye (this is really 
an optical illusion, to which the guides usually call attention) . 
Further associations showed that the general physiognomy of 
the man corresponded with her own clergyman (pope), and the 
5 Given by translator, as the author’s example could not be translated. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


190 

shape of the fair beard recalled her doctor (myself), while the 
stature of the man in the dream recalled her father. All these 
persons stand in the same relation to her; they are all guiding 
and directing the course of her life. On further questioning, the 
golden eye recalled gold — money — the rather expensive psycho- 
analytic treatment, which gives her a great deal of concern. Gold, 
moreover, recalls the gold cure for alcoholism — Herr D., whom 
she would have married, if it had not been for his clinging to the 
disgusting alcohol habit — she does not object to anyone's taking 
an occasional drink; she herself sometimes drinks beer and 
liqueurs. This again brings her back to her visit to San Paolo 
(faori la mura) and its surroundings. She remembers that in the 
neighbouring monastery of the Tre Fontane she drank a liqueur 
made of eucalyptus by the Trappist monks of the monastery. 
She then relates how the monks transformed this malarial and 
swampy region into a dry and wholesome neighbourhood by 
planting numbers of eucalyptus trees. The word “uclamparia” 
then resolves itself into eucalyptus and malarie, and the word wet 
refers to the former swampy nature of the locality. Wet also 
suggests dry. Dry is actually the name of the man whom she 
would have married but for his over-indulgence in alcohol. The 
peculiar name of Dry is of Germanic origin {drei = three) and 
hence, alludes to the monastery of the Three {drei) Fountains. 
In talking of Mr. Dry's habit she used the strong expression: 
“He could drink a fountain." Mr. Dry jocosely refers to his habit 
by saying: “You know I must drink because I am always dry” 
(referring to his name). The eucalyptus refers also to her neu- 
rosis, which was at first diagnosed as malaria . She went to Italy 
because her attacks of anxiety, which were accompanied by 
marked rigors and shivering, were thought to be of malarial 
origin. She bought some eucalyptus oil from the monks, and she 
maintains that it has done her much good. 

The condensation uclamparia — wet is therefore the point of 
junction for the dream as well as for the neurosis. 

3* In a rather long and confused dream of my own, the 
apparent nucleus of which is a sea-voyage, it occurs to me that 
the next port is Hearsing, and next after that Fliess. The latter 
is the name of my friend in B., to which city I have often jour- 


THE DREAM-WORK 


ipi 

neyed. But Hearsing is put together from the names of the places 
in the neighbourhood of Vienna, which so frequently end in 
“ing”: Hietzing , Liesing, Moedling (the old Medelitz, “niece 
delicice “my joy”; that is, my own name, the German for “joy” 
being Frende ) , and the English hearsay , which points to calumny, 
and establishes the relation to the indifferent dream-stimulus 
of the day — a poem in Fliegende Blatter about a slanderous 
dwarf, “Sagter Hatergesagt” (Saidhe Hashesaid). By the com- 
bination of the final syllable ing with the name Fliess, Vlissingen 
is obtained, which is a real port through which my brother passes 
when he comes to visit us from England. But the English for 
Vlissingen is Flushing, which signifies blushing, and recalls pa- 
tients suffering from erythrophobia (fear of blushing), whom I 
sometimes treat, and also a recent publication of Bechterew’s, 
relating to this neurosis, the reading of which angered me. 6 

4. Upon another occasion I had a dream which consisted of 
two separate parts. The first was the vividly remembered word 
“Autodidasker”: the second was a faithful reproduction in the 
dream-content of a short and harmless fancy which had been 
developed a few days earlier, and which was to the effect that I 
must tell Professor N., when I next saw him: “The patient about 
whose condition I last consulted you is really suffering from a 

6 The same analysis and synthesis of syllables — a veritable chemistry of 
syllables — serves us for many a jest in waking life. “What is the cheapest 
method of obtaining silver? You go to a field where silver-berries are grow- 
ing and pick them; then the berries are eliminated and the silver remains 
in a free state.” [Translator’s example] The first person who read and 
criticized this book made the objection — with which other readers will 
probably agree — “that the dreamer often appears too witty.” That is true, 
so long as it applies to the dreamer; it involves a condemnation only when 
its application is extended to the interpreter of the dream. In waking reality 
I can make very little claim to the predicate “witty”; if my dreams appear 
witty, this is not the fault of my individuality, but of the peculiar psycho- 
logical conditions under which the dream is fabricated, and is intimately 
connected with the theory of wit and the comical. The dream becomes witty 
because the shortest and most direct way to the expression of its thoughts 
is barred for it; the dream is under constraint. My readers may convince 
themselves that the dreams of my patients give the impression of being 
quite as witty (at least, in intention) , as my own, and even more so. Never- 
theless, this reproach impelled me to compare the technique of wit with the 
dream-work. 



192 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

neurosis, just as you suspected.” So not only must the newly- 
coined “ Autodidasker” satisfy the requirement that it should 
contain or represent a compressed meaning, but this meaning 
must have a valid connection with my resolve — repeated 
from waking life — to give Professor N. due credit for his diag- 
nosis. 

Now Autodidasker is easily separated into author (German, 
Autor ), autodidact, and Lasker , with whom is associated the 
name Lasalle. The first of these words leads to the occasion of 
the dream — which this time is significant. I had brought home 
to my wife several volumes by a well-known author who is a 
friend of my brother's, and who, as I have learned, comes from 
the same neighbourhood as myself (J. J. David). One evening 
she told me how profoundly impressed she had been by the 
pathetic sadness of a story in one of David's novels (a story of 
wasted talents), and our conversation turned upon the signs of 
talent which we perceive in our own children. Under the influ- 
ence of what she had just read, my wife expressed some concern 
about our children, and I comforted her with the remark that 
precisely such dangers as she feared can be averted by training. 
Duing the night my thoughts proceeded farther, took up my 
wife's concern for the children, and interwove with it all sorts of 
other things. Something which the novelist had said to my 
brother on the subject of marriage showed my thoughts a by- 
path which might lead to representation in the dream. This path 
led to Breslau; a lady who was a very good friend of ours had 
married and gone to live there. I found in Breslau Lasker and 
Lasalle, two examples to justify the fear lest our boys should 
be ruined by women, examples which enabled me to represent 
simultaneously two ways of influencing a man to his undoing . 7 
The Cherchez la jemme, by which these thoughts may be sum- 
marized, leads me, if taken in another sense, to my brother, who 
is still unmarried and whose name is Alexander . Now I see that 
Alex, as we abbreviate the name, sounds almost like an inversion 

T Lasker died of progressive paralysis ; that is, of the consequences of an in- 
fection caught from a woman (syphilis) ; Lasalle, also a syphilitic, was 
killed in a duel which he fought on account of the lady whom he had been 
courting. 



THE DREAM- WORK 1 93 

of Lasker , and that this fact must have contributed to send my 
thoughts on a detour by way of Breslau. 

But the playing with names and syllables in which I am here 
engaged has yet another meaning. It represents the wish that my 
brother may enjoy a happy family life, and this in the following 
manner: In the novel of artistic life, L’CEuvre, which, by virtue 
of its content, must have been in association with my dream- 
thoughts, the author, as is well-known, has incidentally given a 
description of his own person and his own domestic happiness, 
and appears under the name of Sandoz . In the metamorphosis 
of his name he probably went to work as follows: Zola , when 
inverted (as children are fond of inverting names) gives Aloz . 
But this was still too undisguised; he therefore replaced the 
syllable Al, which stands at the beginning of the name Alexan- 
der, by the third syllable of the same name, sand, and thus 
arrived at Sandoz. My autodidasker originated in a similar 
fashion. 

My phantasy — that I am telling Professor N. that the patient 
whom we have both seen is suffering from a neurosis — found its 
way into the dream in the following manner: Shortly before the 
close of my working year I had a patient in whose case my 
powers of diagnosis failed me. A serious organic trouble — pos- 
sibly some alterative degeneration of the spinal cord — was to be 
assumed, but could not be conclusively demonstrated. It would 
have been tempting to diagnose the trouble as a neurosis, and 
this would have put an end to all my difficulties, but for the fact 
that the sexual anamnesis, failing which I am unwilling to admit 
a neurosis, was so energetically denied by the patient. In my 
embarrassment I called to my assistance the physician whom I 
respect most of all men (as others do also), and to whose author- 
ity I surrender most completely. He listened to my doubts, told 
me he thought them justified, and then said: “Keep on observing 
the man, it is probably a neurosis.” Since I know that he does 
not share my opinions concerning the etiology of the neuroses, 
I refrained from contradicting him, but I did not conceal my 
scepticism. A few days later I informed the patient that I did 
not know what to do with him, and advised him to go to someone 



194 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

else. Thereupon, to my great astonishment, he began to beg my 
pardon for having lied to me; he had felt so ashamed; and now 
he revealed to me just that piece of sexual etiology which I had 
expected, and which I found necessary for assuming the existence 
of a neurosis. This was a relief to me, but at the same time a 
humiliation; for I had to admit that my consultant, who was not 
disconcerted by the absence of anamnesis, had judged the case 
more correctly. I made up my mind to tell him, when next I saw 
him, that he had been right and I had been wrong. 

This is just what I do in the dream. But what sort of a wish 
is fulfilled if I acknowledge that I am mistaken? This is precisely 
my wish; I wish to be mistaken as regards my fears — that is to 
say, I wish that my wife, whose fears I have appropriated in my 
dream-thoughts, may prove to be mistaken. The subject to 
which the fact of being right or wrong is related in the dream is 
not far removed from that which is really of interest to the 
dream-thoughts. We have the same pair of alternatives, of either 
organic or functional impairment caused by a woman, or actually 
by the sexual life — either tabetic paralysis or a neurosis — with 
which latter the nature of Lasalle’s undoing is indirectly con- 
nected. 

In this well-constructed (and on careful analysis quite trans- 
parent) dream, Professor N. appears not merely on account of 
this analogy, and my wish to be proved mistaken, or the asso- 
ciated references to Breslau and to the family of our married 
friend who lives there, but also on account of the following little 
dialogue which followed our consultation: After he had acquitted 
himself of his professional duties by making the above-mentioned 
suggestion, Dr. N. proceeded to discuss personal matters. “How 
many children have you now?” — “Six.” — A thoughtful and re- 
spectful gesture. — “Girls, boys?” — “Three of each. They are 
my pride and my riches.” — “Well, you must be careful; there is 
no difficulty about the girls, but the boys are a difficulty later 
on as regards their upbringing.” I replied that until now they 
had been very tractable; obviously this prognosis of my boys' 
future pleased me as little as his diagnosis of my patient, whom 
he believed to be suffering only from a neurosis. These two im- 
pressions, then, are connected by their contiguity, by their being 


THE DREAM-WORK 


195 

successively received; and when I incorporate the story of the 
neurosis into the dream, I substitute it for the conversation on 
the subject of upbringing, which is even more closely connected 
with the dream-thoughts, since it touches so closely upon the 
anxiety subsequently expressed by my wife. Thus, even my fear 
that N. may prove to be right in his remarks on the difficulties 
to be met with in bringing up boys is admitted into the dream- 
content, inasmuch as it is concealed behind the representation 
of my wish that I may be wrong to harbour such apprehensions. 
The same phantasy serves without alteration to represent both 
the conflicting alternatives. 

Examination-dreams present the same difficulties to interpre- 
tation that I have already described as characteristic of most 
typical dreams. The associative material which the dreamer sup- 
plies only rarely suffices for interpretation. A deeper under- 
standing of such dreams has to be accumulated from a consider- 
able number of examples. Not long ago I arrived at a conviction 
that reassurances like “But you already are a doctor,” and so on, 
not only convey a consolation but imply a reproach as well. This 
would have run: “You are already so old, so far advanced in life, 
and yet you still commit such follies, are guilty of such childish 
behaviour.” This mixture of self-criticism and consolation would 
correspond with the examination-dreams. After this it is no 
longer surprising that the reproaches in the last analysed ex- 
amples concerning “follies” and “childish behaviour” should 
relate to repetitions of reprehensible sexual acts. 

The verbal transformations in dreams are very similar to those 
which are known to occur in paranoia, and which are observed 
also in hysteria and obsessions. The linguistic tricks of children, 
who at a certain age actually treat words as objects, and even in- 
vent new languages and artificial syntaxes, are a common source 
of such occurrences both in dreams and in the psychoneuroses. 

The analysis of nonsensical word-formations in dreams is par- 
ticularly well suited to demonstrate the degree of condensation 
effected in the dream-work. From the small number of the 
selected examples here considered it must not be concluded that 
such material is seldom observed or is at all exceptional. It is, 
on the contrary, very frequent, but owing to the dependence of 



196 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

dream-interpretation on psychoanalytic treatment very few ex- 
amples are noted down and reported, and most of the analyses 
which are reported are comprehensible only to the specialist in 
neuropathology. 

When a spoken utterance, expressly distinguished as such 
from a thought, occurs in a dream, it is an invariable rule that 
the dream-speech has originated from a remembered speech in 
the dream-material. The wording of the speech has either been 
preserved in its entirety or has been slightly altered in expres- 
sion; frequently the dream-speech is pieced together from dif- 
ferent recollections of spoken remarks; the wording has re- 
mained the same, but the sense has perhaps become ambiguous, 
or differs from the wording. Not infrequently the dream-speech 
serves merely as an allusion to an incident in connection with 
which the remembered speech was made . 8 

B. THE WORK OF DISPLACEMENT 

Another and probably no less significant relation must have 
already forced itself upon our attention while we were collecting 
examples of dream-condensation. We may have noticed that 
these elements which obtrude themselves in the dream-content 
as its essential components do not by any means play this same 
part in the dream-thoughts. As a corollary to this, the converse 
of this statement is also true. That which is obviously the essen- 
tial content of the dream-thoughts need not be represented at all 
in the dream. The dream is, as it were, centred elsewhere; its 
content is arranged about elements which do not constitute the 
central point of the dream-thoughts. Thus, for ex ample, in the 
dream of the botanical monograph the central point of the dream- 
content is evidently the element “botanical”; in the dream- 
thoughts we are concerned with the complications and conflicts 
resulting from services rendered between colleagues which place 

8 In the case of a young man who was suffering from obsessions, but whose 
intellectual functions were intact and highly developed, I recently found 
the only exception to this rule. The speeches which occurred in his dreams 
did not originate in speeches which he had heard or had made himself , but 
corresponded to the undistorted verbal expression of his obsessive thoughts^ 
which came to his waking consciousness only in an altered form. 


the dream-work 197 

them under mutual obligations ; later on with the reproach t hat 
I am in the habit of sacrificing too much time to my hobbies; and 
the element “botanical 55 finds no place in this nucleus of the 
dream-thoughts, unless it is loosely connected with it by antith- 
esis, for botany was never among my favourite subjects. In the 
Sappho-dream of my patient, ascending and descending, being 
upstairs and down, is made the central point; the dream, how- 
ever, is concerned with the danger of sexual relations with per- 
sons of “low” degree; so that only one of the elements of the 
dream-thoughts seems to have found its way into the dream- 
content, and this is unduly expanded. Again, in the dream of my 
uncle, the fair beard, which seems to be its central point, appears 
to have no rational connection with the desire for greatness which 
we have recognized as the nucleus of the dream-thoughts. Such 
dreams very naturally give us an impression of a “displacement . 5 5 
In complete contrast to these examples, the dream of Irma 5 s 
injection shows that individual elements may claim the same 
place in dream-formation as that which they occupy in the 
dream-thoughts. The recognition of this new and utterly in- 
constant relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream- 
content will probably astonish us at first. If we find in a psychic 
process of normal life that one idea has been selected from 
among a number of others, and has acquired a particular empha- 
sis in our consciousness, we are wont to regard this as proof that 
a peculiar psychic value (a certain degree of interest) attaches 
to the victorious idea. We now discover that this value of the 
individual element in the dream-thoughts is not retained in 
dream-formation, or is not taken into account. For there is no 
doubt which of the elements of the dream-thoughts are of the 
highest value; our judgment informs us immediately. In dream- 
formation the essential elements, those that are emphasized by 
intensive interest, may be treated as though they were subordi- 
nate, while they are replaced in the dream by other elements, 
which were certainly subordinate in the dream- thoughts. It seems 
at first as though the psychic intensity 9 of individual ideas were 

9 The psychic intensity or value of an idea — the emphasis due to inter- 
est— is of course to be distinguished from perceptual or conceptual in- 
tensity. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


198 

of no account in their selection for dream-formation, but only 
their greater or lesser multiplicity of determination. One might 
be inclined to think that what gets into the dream is not what is 
important in the dream-thoughts, but what is contained in them 
several times over; but our understanding of dream- formation 
is not much advanced by this assumption; to begin with, we 
cannot believe that the two motives of multiple determination 
and intrinsic value can influence the selection of the dream other- 
wise than in the same direction. Those ideas in the dream- 
thoughts which are most important are probably also those which 
recur most frequently, since the individual dream-thoughts radi- 
ate from them as centres. And yet the dream may reject these 
intensively emphasized and extensively reinforced elements, and 
may take up into its content other elements which are only 
extensively reinforced. 

This difficulty may be solved if we follow up yet another im- 
pression received during the investigation of the over-determi- 
nation of the dream-content. Many readers of this investigation 
may already have decided, in their own minds, that the discovery 
of the multiple determination of the dream-elements is of no 
great importance, because it is inevitable. Since in analysis we 
proceed from the dream-elements, and register all the ideas which 
associate themselves with these elements, is it any wonder that 
these elements should recur with peculiar frequency in the 
thought-material obtained in this manner? While I cannot admit 
the validity of this objection, I am now going to say something 
that sounds rather like it: Among the thoughts which analysis 
brings to light are many which are far removed from the nucleus 
of the dream, and which stand out like artificial interpolations 
made for a definite purpose. Their purpose may readily be de- 
tected; they establish a connection, often a forced and far- 
fetched connection, between the dream-content and the dream- 
thoughts, and in many cases, if these elements were weeded out 
of the analysis, the components of the dream-content would not 
only not be over-determined, but they would not be sufficiently 
determined. We are thus led to the conclusion that multiple de- 
termination, decisive as regards the selection made by the dream, 
is perhaps not always a primary factor in dream-formation, but 


THE DREAM-WORK 


199 

is often a secondary product of a psychic force which is as yet 
unknown to us. Nevertheless, it must be of importance for the 
entrance of the individual elements into the dream, for we may 
observe that in cases where multiple determination does not 
proceed easily from the dream-material it is brought about with 
a certain effort. 

It now becomes very probable that a psychic force expresses 
itself in the dream-work which, on the one hand, strips the ele- 
ments of the high psychic value of their intensity and, on the 
other hand, by means of over-determination , creates new signifi- 
cant values from elements of slight value, which new values then 
make their way into the dream-content. Now if this is the 
method of procedure, there has occurred in the process of dream- 
formation a transference and displacement of the psychic inten- 
sities of the individual elements, from which results the textual 
difference between the dream-content and the thought-content. 
The process which we here assume to be operative is actually the 
most essential part of the dream-work; it may fitly be called 
dream-displacement . Dream-displacement and dream-condensa- 
tion are the two craftsmen to whom we may chiefly ascribe the 
structure of the dream. 

I think it will be easy to recognize the psychic force which 
expresses itself in dream-displacement. The result of this dis- 
placement is that the dream-content no longer has any likeness 
to the nucleus of the dream-thoughts, and the dream reproduces 
only a distorted form of the dream-wish in the unconscious. But 
we are already acquainted with dream-distortion; we have traced 
it back to the censorship which one psychic instance in the psy- 
chic life exercises over another. Dream-displacement is one of 
the chief means of achieving this distortion. Is fecit , cut profuit. 
We must assume that dream-displacement is brought about by 
the influence of this censorship, the endopsychic defence . 10 

10 Since I regard the attribution of dream-distortion to the censorship as 
the central point of my conception of the dream, I will here quote the dos- 
ing passage of a story, Trdumen wie Wachen, from Phantaszen eines Realis- 
ten , by Lynkeus (Vienna, second edition, 1900) , in which I find this chief 
feature of my doctrine reproduced: 

“Concerning a man who possesses the remarkable faculty of never dreams 
ing nonsense. . . 



200 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


The manner in which the factors of displacement, condensa- 
tion and over-determination interact with one another in dream- 
formation — which is the ruling factor and which the subordinate 
one — all this will be reserved as a subject for later investigation. 
In the meantime, we may state, as a second condition which the 
elements that find their way into the dream must satisfy, that 
they must be withdrawn from the resistance of the censorship . 
But henceforth, in the interpretation of dreams, we shall reckon 
with dream-displacement as an unquestionable fact. 

C. THE MEANS OF REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS 

Besides the two factors of condensation and displacement in 
dreams, which we have found to be at work in the transforma- 
tion of the latent dream-material into the manifest dream-con- 
tent, we shall, in the course of this investigation, come upon two 
further conditions which exercise an unquestionable influence 

“Your marvellous faculty of dreaming as if you were awake is based 
upon your virtues, upon your goodness, your justice, and your love of 
truth; it is the moral clarity of your nature which makes everything about 
you intelligible to me.” 

“But if I really give thought to the matter,” was the reply, “I almost 
believe that all men are made as I am, and that no one ever dreams non- 
sense ! A dream which one remembers so distinctly that one can relate it 
afterwards, and which, therefore, is no dream of delirium, always has a 
meaning; why, it cannot be otherwise! For that which is in contradiction 
to itself can never be combined into a whole. The fact that time and space 
are often thoroughly shaken up, detracts not at all from the real content 
of the dream, because both are without any significance whatever for its 
essential content. We often do the same thing in waking life; think of fairy- 
tales, of so many bold and pregnant creations of fantasy, of which only a 
foolish person would say: ‘That is nonsense 1 For it isn’t possible.’ ” 

“If only it were always possible to interpret dreams correctly, as you have 
just done with mine I” said the friend. 

“That is certainly not an easy task, but with a little attention it must 
always be possible to the dreamer. — You ask why it is generally impossible ? 
In your case there seems to be something veiled in your dreams, something 
unchaste in a special and exalted fashion, a certain secrecy in your nature, 
which it is difficult to fathom; and that is why your dreams so often seem 
to be without meaning, or even nonsensical. But in the profoundest sense, 
this is by no means the case ; indeed it cannot be, for a man is always the 
same person, whether he wakes or dreams.” 



THE DREAM-WORK 


201 


over the selection of the material that eventually appears in 
the dream. But first, even at the risk of seeming to interrupt our 
progress, I shall take a preliminary glance at the processes by 
which the interpretation of dreams is accomplished. I do not 
deny that the best way of explaining them, and of convincing 
the critic of their reliability, would be to take a single dream as 
an example, to detail its interpretation, as I did (in Chapter II) 
in the case of the dream of Irma’s injection, but then to as- 
semble the dream-thoughts which I had discovered, and from 
them to reconstruct the formation of the dream — that is to say, 
to supplement dream-analysis by dream-synthesis. I have done 
this with several specimens for my own instruction; but I can- 
not undertake to do it here, as I am prevented by a number of 
considerations (relating to the psychic material necessary for 
such a demonstration) such as any right-thinking person would 
approve. In the analysis of dreams these considerations present 
less difficulty, for an analysis may be incomplete and still retain 
its value, even if it leads only a little way into the structure of 
the dream. I do not see how a synthesis, to be convincing, could 
be anything short of complete. I could give a complete synthesis 
only of the dreams of such persons as are unknown to the read- 
ing public. Since, however, neurotic patients are the only per- 
sons who furnish me with the means of making such a synthesis, 
this part of the description of dreams must be postponed until I 
can carry the psychological explanation of the neuroses far 
enough to demonstrate their relation to our subject . 11 This will 
be done elsewhere. 

From my attempts to construct dreams synthetically from 
their dream-thoughts, I know that the material which is yielded 
by interpretation varies in value. Part of it consists of the es- 
sential dream-thoughts, which would completely replace the 
dream and would in themselves be a sufficient substitute for it, 
were there no dream-censorship. To the other part one is wont 

11 1 have since given the complete analysis and synthesis of two dreams in 
the Bruckstuck einer Hysteneanalyse , 1905 (Ges. Schriften , Bd. viii). 
Fragment of an Analysis of a Case of Hysteria, translated by Strachey, 
Collected Papers, vol. iii, Hogarth Press, London. 0 . Rank’s analysis, Ein 
Traum der sick selbst deutet , deserves mention as the most complete inter- 
pretation of a comparatively long dream. 



202 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

to ascribe slight importance, nor does one set any value on the 
assertion that all these thoughts have participated in the forma- 
tion of the dream; on the contrary, they may include notions 
which are associated with experiences that have occurred sub- 
sequently to the dream, between the dream and the interpreta- 
tion. This part comprises not only all the connecting-paths 
which have led from the manifest to the latent dream-content, 
but also the intermediate and approximating associations by 
means of which one has arrived at a knowledge of these con- 
necting-paths during the work of interpretation. 

At this point we are interested exclusively in the essential 
dream-thoughts. These commonly reveal themselves as a com- 
plex of thoughts and memories of the most intricate possible 
construction, with all the characteristics of the thought-processes 
known to us in waking life. Not infrequently they are trains of 
thought which proceed from more than one centre, but which 
are not without points of contact; and almost invariably we 
find, along with a train of thought, its contradictory counter- 
part, connected with it by the association of contrast. 

The individual parts of this complicated structure naturally 
stand in the most manifold logical relations to one another. They 
constitute foreground and background, digressions, illustra- 
tions, conditions, lines of argument and objections. When the 
whole mass of these dream-thoughts is subjected to the pressure 
of the dream-work, during which the fragments are turned 
about, broken up and compacted, somewhat like drifting ice, 
the question arises, what becomes of the logical ties which had 
hitherto provided the framework of the structure? What repre- 
sentation do “if,” “because,” “as though,” “although,” “either 
—or” and all the other conjunctions, without which we cannot 
understand a phrase or a sentence, receive in our dreams? 

To begin with, we must answer that the dream has at its dis- 
posal no means of representing these logical relations between 
the dream-thoughts. In most cases it disregards all these con- 
junctions, and undertakes the elaboration only of the material 
content of the dream-thoughts. It is left to the interpretation 
of the dream to restore the coherence which the dream-work 
has destroyed. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


203 

If dreams lack the ability to express these relations, the 
psychic material of which they are wrought must be responsible 
for this defect. As a matter of fact, the representative arts — 
painting and sculpture — are similarly restricted, as compared 
with poetry, which is able to employ speech; and here again 
the reason for this limitation lies in the material by the elabora- 
tion of which the two plastic arts endeavour to express some- 
thing. Before the art of painting arrived at an understanding of 
the laws of expression by which it is bound, it attempted to 
make up for this deficiency. In old paintings little labels hung 
out of the mouths of the persons represented, giving in writing 
the speech which the artist despaired of expressing in the picture. 

Here, perhaps an objection will be raised, challenging the 
' assertion that our dreams dispense with the representation of 
logical relations. There are dreams in which the most compli- 
cated intellectual operations take place; arguments for and 
against are adduced, jokes and comparisons are made, just as 
in our waking thoughts. But here again appearances are de- 
ceptive; if the interpretation of such dreams is continued it will 
be found that all these things are dream-material , not the repre- 
sentation of intellectual activity in the dream . The content of 
the dream-thoughts is reproduced by the apparent thinking in 
our dreams, but not the relations of the dream-thoughts to one 
another, in the determination of which relations thinking con- 
sists. I shall give some examples of this. But the fact which is 
most easily established is that all speeches which occur in dreams, 
and which are expressly designated as such, are unchanged or 
only slightly modified replicas of speeches which occur likewise 
among the memories in the dream-material. Often the speech is 
only an allusion to an event contained in the dream-thoughts; 
the meaning of the dream is quite different. 

However, I shall not dispute the fact that even critical thought- 
activity, which does not simply repeat material from the dream- 
thoughts, plays a part in dream-formation. I shall have to ex- 
plain the influence of this factor at the close of this discussion. 
It will then become clear that this thought activity is evoked not 
by the dream-thoughts, but by the dream itself, after it is, in a 
certain sense, already completed. 



204 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

Provisionally, then, it is agreed that the logical relations be- 
tween the dream-thoughts do not obtain any particular repre- 
sentation in the dream. For instance, where there is a contra- 
diction in the dream, this is either a contradiction directed 
against the dream itself or a contradiction contained in one of 
the dream- thoughts; a contradiction in the dream corresponds 
with a contradiction between the dream-thoughts only in the 
most indirect and intermediate fashion. 

But just as the art of painting finally succeeded in depicting, 
in the persons represented, at least the intentions behind their 
words — tenderness, menace, admonition, and the like — by other 
means than by floating labels, so also the dream has found it 
possible to render an account of certain of the logical relations 
between its dream-thoughts by an appropriate modification of 
the peculiar method of dream-representation. It will be found 
by experience that different dreams go to different lengths in 
this respect; while one dream will entirely disregard the logical 
structure of its material, another attempts to indicate it as com- 
pletely as possible. In so doing the dream departs more or less 
widely from the text which it has to elaborate; and its attitude 
is equally variable in respect to the temporal articulation of 
the dream-thoughts, if such has been established in the uncon- 
scious (as, for example, in the dream of Irma’s injection) . 

But what are the means by which the dream-work is enabled 
to indicate those relations in the dream-material which are dif- 
ficult to represent? I shall attempt to enumerate these, one by 
one. 

In the first place, the dream renders an account of the con- 
nection which is undeniably present between all the. portions of 
the dream-thoughts by combining this material into a unity as 
a situation or a proceeding. It reproduces logical connection in 
the form of simultaneity; in this case it behaves rather like the 
painter who groups together all the philosophers or poets in a 
picture of the School of Athens, or Parnassus. They never were 
assembled in any hall or on any mountain-top, although to the 
reflective mind they do constitute a community. 

The dream carries out in detail this mode of representation. 
Whenever it shows two elements close together, it vouches for 


THE DREAM-WORK 


205 

a particularly intimate connection between their corresponding 
representatives in the dream-thoughts. It is as in our method 
of writing: to signifies that the two letters are to be pronounced 
as one syllable; while t with o following a blank space indicates 
that t is the last letter of one word and o the first letter of an- 
other. Consequently, dream-combinations are not made up of 
arbitrary, completely incongruous elements of the dream-mate* 
rial, but of elements that are pretty intimately related in the 
dream-thoughts also. 

For representing causal relations our dreams employ two 
methods, which are essentially reducible to one. The method of 
representation more frequently employed — in cases, for ex- 
ample, where the dream-thoughts are to the effect: “Because 
this was thus and thus, this and that must happen” — consists 
in making the subordinate clause a prefatory dream and joining 
the principal clause on to it in the form of the main dream. If my 
interpretation is correct, the sequence may likewise be reversed. 
The principal clause always corresponds to that part of the 
dream which is elaborated in the greatest detail. 

An excellent example of such a representation of causality 
was once provided by a female patient, whose dream I shall sub- 
sequently give in full. The dream consisted of a short prologue, 
and of a very circumstantial and very definitely centred dream- 
composition. I might entitle it “Flowery language.” The pre- 
liminary dream is as follows: She goes to the two maids in the 
kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare “ a little 
bite of food” She also sees a very large number of heavy kitchen 
utensils in the kitchen turned upside down in order to drain , 
even heaped up in stacks . The two maids go to fetch water , and 
have , as it were , to climb into a river, which reaches up to the 
house or into the courtyard . 

Then follows the main dream, which begins as follows: She is 
climbing down from a height over a curiously shaped trellis, and 
she is glad that her dress doesn’t get caught anywhere, etc . Now 
the preliminary dream refers to the house of the lady’s parents. 
The words which are spoken in the kitchen are words which she 
has probably often heard spoken by her mother. The piles of 
clumsy pots and pans are taken from an unpretentious hard- 



ao6 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

ware shop located in the same house. The second part of this 
dream contains an allusion to the dreamer’s father, who was 
always pestering the maids, and who during a flood — for the 
house stood dose to the bank of the river — contracted a fatal 
illness. The thought which is concealed behind the preliminary 
dream is something like this: “Because I was born in this house, 
in such sordid and unpleasant surroundings . . The main 
dream takes up the same thought, and presents it in a form that 
has been altered by a wish-fulfilment: “I am of exalted origin.” 
Properly then: “Because I am of such humble origin, the course 
of my life has been so and so.” 

As far as I can see, the division of a dream into two unequal 
portions does not always signify a causal relation between the 
thoughts of the two portions. It often seems as though in the 
two dreams the same material were presented from different 
points of view; this is certainly the case when a series of dreams, 
dreamed the same night, end in a seminal emission, the so matic 
need enforcing a more and more definite expression. Or the two 
dreams have proceeded from two separate centres in the dream- 
material, and they overlap one another in the content, so that 
the subject which in one dream constitutes the centre co-operates 
in the other as an allusion, and vice versa. But in a certain num- 
ber of dreams the division into short preliminary dreams and 
long subsequent dreams actually signifies a causal relation be- 
tween the two portions. The other method of representing the 
causal relation is employed with less comprehensive material, 
and consists in the transformation of an image in the dream into 
another image, whether it be of a person or a thing. Only where 
this transformation is actually seen occurring in the dream shall 
we seriously insist on the causal relation ; not where we simply note 
that one thing has taken the place of another. I said that both 
methods of representing the causal relation are really reducible 
to the same method; in both cases causation is represented by 
succession, sometimes by the succession of dreams, sometimes 
by the immediate transformation of one image into another. In 
the great majority of cases, of course, the causal relation is not 
represented at all, but is effaced amidst the succession of ele- 
ments that is unavoidable even in the dream-process. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


207 

Dreams are quite incapable of expressing the alternative 
"either — or”; it is their custom to take both members of this 
alternative into the same context, as though they had an equal 
right to be there. A classic example of this is contained in the 
dream of Irma’s injection. Its latent thoughts obviously mean: 
I am not responsible for the persistence of Irma’s pains; the re- 
sponsibility rests either with her resistance to accepting the 
solution or with the fact that she is living under unfavourable 
sexual conditions, which I am unable to change, or her pains 
are not hysterical at all, but organic. The dream, however, car- 
ries out all these possibilities, which are almost mutually ex- 
clusive, and is quite ready to add a fourth solution derived from 
the dream-wish. After interpreting the dream, I then inserted 
the either — or in its context in the dream-thoughts. 

But when in narrating a dream the narrator is inclined to em- 
ploy the alternative either — or: “It was either a garden or a 
living-room,” etc., there is not really an alternative in the dream- 
thoughts, but an “and” — a simple addition. When we use either 
— or we are as a rule describing a quality of vagueness in some 
element of the dream, but a vagueness which may still be cleared 
up. The rule to be applied in this case is as follows: The indi- 
vidual members of the alternative are to be treated as equal and 
connected by an “and.” For instance, after waiting long and 
vainly for the address of a friend who is travelling in Italy, I 
dream that I receive a telegram which gives me the address. On 
the telegraph form I see printed in blue letters: the first word is 
blurred — perhaps via 

or villa; the second is distinctly Sezemo , 
or even ( Casa ). 

The second word, which reminds me of Italian names, and of 
our discussions on etymology, also expresses my annoyance in 
respect of the fact that my friend has kept his address a secret 
from me; but each of the possible first three words may be recog- 
nized on analysis as an independent and equally justifiable 
starting-point in the concatenation of ideas. 

During the night before the funeral of my father I dreamed 0/. 
a printed placard, a card or poster rather like the notices in the 


20 & 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


waiting-rooms of railway stations which announce that smoking 
is prohibited. The sign reads either: — 

You are requested to shut the eyes 
or 

You are requested to shut one eye 

an alternative which I am in the habit of representing in the 
following form: 


the 

You are requested to shut eye(s) . 

one 

Each of the two versions has its special meaning, and leads 
along particular paths in the dream-interpretation. I had made 
the simplest possible funeral arrangements, for I knew what the 
deceased thought about such matters. Other members of the 
family, however, did not approve of such puritanical simplicity; 
they thought we should feel ashamed in the presence of the other 
mourners. Hence one of the wordings of the dream asks for the 
“shutting of one eye,” that is to say, it asks that people should 
show consideration. The significance of the vagueness, which 
is here represented by an either — or, is plainly to be seen. The 
dream-work has not succeeded in concocting a coherent and yet 
ambiguous wording for the dream-thoughts. Thus the two prin- 
cipal trains of thought are separated from each other, even in 
the dream-content. 

In some few cases the division of a dream into two equal parts 
expresses the alternative which the dream finds it so difficult to 
present. 

The attitude of dreams to the category of antithesis and con- 
tradiction is very striking. This category is simply ignored; the 
word “No” does not seem to exist for a dream. Dreams are par- 
ticularly fond of reducing antitheses to uniformity, or repre- 
senting them as one and the same thing. Dreams likewise take 
the liberty of representing any element whatever by its desired 



THE DREAM-WORK 


209 

opposite, so that it is at first impossible to tell, in respect of any 
element which is capable of having an opposite, whether it is 
contained in the dream-thoughts in the negative or the positive 
sense . 12 In one of the recently cited dreams, whose introductory 
portion we have already interpreted (“because my origin is so 
and so”), the dreamer climbs down over a trellis, and holds a 
blossoming bough in her hands. Since this picture suggests to 
her the angel in paintings of the Annunciation (her own name is 
Mary) bearing a lily-stem in his hand, and the white-robed girls 
walking in procession on Corpus Christ! Day, when the streets 
are decorated with green boughs, the blossoming bough in the 
dream is quite clearly an allusion to sexual innocence. But the 
bough is thickly studded with red blossoms, each of which re- 
sembles a camellia. At the end of her walk (so the dream con- 
tinues) the blossoms are already beginning to fall; then follow 
unmistakable allusions to menstruation. But this very bough, 
which is carried like a lily-stem and as though by an innocent 
girl, is also an allusion to Camille, who, as we know, usually wore 
a white camellia, but a red one during menstruation. The same 
blossoming bough (“the flower of maidenhood” in Goethe's 
songs of the miller's daughter) represents at once sexual inno- 
cence and its opposite. Moreover, the same dream, which ex- 
presses the dreamer’s joy at having succeeded in passing through 
life unsullied, hints in several places (as in the falling of the 
blossom) at the opposite train of thought, namely, that she had 
been guilty of various sins against sexual purity (that is, in her 
childhood). In the analysis of the dream we may clearly dis- 
tinguish the two trains of thought, of which the comforting one 

12 From a work of 3 L Abel’s Der Gegensinn der Urworte, 1884 (see my 
review of it in the Bleuler-Freud Jahrbuch, ii, 1910 (Ges. Schriften, Bd. x), 
I learned the surprising fact, which is confirmed by other philologists, that 
the oldest languages behaved just as dreams do in this regard. They had 
originally only one word for both extremes in a series of qualities or activ- 
ities (strong — weak, old — young, far — near, bind — separate), and formed 
separate designations for the two opposites only secondarily, by slight 
modifications of the common primitive word. Abel demonstrates a very 
large number of those relationships in ancient Egyptian, and points to dis- 
tinct remnants of the same development in the Semitic and Indo-Germanic 
languages. 



210 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

seems to be superficial, and the reproachful one more profound. 
The two are diametrically opposed to each other, and their 
similar yet contrasting elements have been represented by iden- 
tical dream-elements. 

The mechanism of dream-formation is favourable in the high- 
est degree to only one of the logical relations. This relation is 
that of similarity, agreement, contiguity, “just as”; a relation 
which may be represented in our dreams, as no other can be, by 
the most varied expedients. The “screening” which occurs in 
the dream-material, or the cases of “just as,” are the chief points 
of support for dream-formation, and a not inconsiderable part 
of the dream-work consists in creating new “screenings” of this 
kind in cases where those that already exist are prevented by 
the resistance of the censorship from making their way into the 
dream. The effort towards condensation evinced by the dream- 
w Y ork facilitates the representation of a relation of similarity. 

Similarity, agreement, community, are quite generally ex- 
pressed in dreams by contraction into a unity, which is either 
already found in the dream-material or is newly created. The 
first case may be referred to as identification, the second as 
composition. Identification is used where the dream is concerned 
with persons, composition where things constitute the material 
to be unified; but compositions are also made of persons. Local- 
ities are often treated as persons. 

Identification consists in giving representation in the dream- 
content to only one of two or more persons who are related by 
some common feature, while the second person or other persons 
appear to be suppressed as far as the dream is concerned. In 
the dream this one “screening” person enters into all the rela- 
tions and situations which derive from the persons whom she 
screens. In cases of composition, however, when persons are 
combined, there are already present in the dream-image fea- 
tures which are characteristic of, but not common to, the per- 
sons in question, so that a new unity, a composite person, ap- 
pears as the result of the union of these features. The combina- 
tion itself may be effected in various ways. Either the dream- 
person bears the name of one of the persons to whom he refers 
— and in this case we simply know, in a manner that is quite 


THE BREAM-WORK. 


2X1 


analogous to knowledge in waking life, that this or that person 
is intended — while the visual features belong to another person; 
or the dream-image itself is compounded of visual ieatures 
which in reality are derived from the two. Also, in place of the 
visual features, the part played by the second person may be 
represented by the attitudes and gestures which are usually 
ascribed to him by the words he speaks, or by the situations in 
which he is placed. In this latter method of characterization the 
sharp distinction between the identification and the combination 
of persons begins to disappear. But it may also happen that the 
formation of such a composite person is unsuccessful. The situa- 
tions or actions of the dream are then attributed to one person, 
and the other — as a rule the more important — is introduced as 
an inactive spectator. Perhaps the dreamer will say : “My mother 
was there too” (Stekel). Such an element of the dream-content 
is then comparable to a determinative in hieroglyphic script 
which is not meant to be expressed, but is intended only to ex- 
plain another sign. 

The common feature which justifies the union of two persons 
— that is to say, which enables it to be made — may either be 
represented in the dream or it may be absent. As a rule identifi- 
cation or composition of persons actually serves to avoid the 
necessity of representing this common feature. Instead of re- 
peating: “A is ill-disposed towards me, and so is B,” I make, in 
my dream, a composite person of A and B; or I conceive A as 
doing something which is alien to his character, but which is 
characteristic of B. The dream-person obtained in this way ap- 
pears in the dream in some new connection, and the fact that 
he signifies both A and B justifies my inserting that which is 
common to both persons — their hostility towards me — at the 
proper place in the dream-interpretation. In this manner I often 
achieve a quite extraordinary degree of condensation of the 
dream-content; I am able to dispense with the direct represen- 
tation of the very complicated relations belonging to one person, 
if I can find a second person who has an equal claim to some of 
these relations. It will be readily understood how far this repre- 
sentation by means of identification may circumvent the cen- 
soring resistance which sets up such harsh conditions for the 


212 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

dream-work. The thing that offends the censorship may reside 
in those very ideas which are connected in the dream-material 
with the one person; I now find a second person, who likewise 
stands in some relation to the objectionable material, but only 
to a part of it. Contact at that one point which offends the cen- 
sorship now justifies my formation of a composite person, who 
is characterized by the indifferent features of each. This person, 
the result of combination or identification, being free of the 
censorship, is now suitable for incorporation in the dream- 
content. Thus, by the application of dream-condensation, I have 
satisfied the demands of the dream-censorship. 

When a common feature of two persons is represented in a 
dream, this is usually a hint to look for another concealed com- 
mon feature, the representation of which is made impossible by 
the censorship. Here a displacement of the common feature has 
occurred, which in some degree facilitates representation. From 
the circumstance that the composite person is shown to me in 
the dream with an indifferent common feature, I must infer 
that another common feature which is by no means indifferent 
exists in the dream-thoughts. 

Accordingly, the identification or combination of persons 
serves various purposes in our dreams; in the first place, that 
of representing a feature common to two persons; secondly, that 
of representing a displaced common feature; and, thirdly, that 
of expressing a community of features which is merely wished 
for . As the wish for a community of features in two persons 
often coincides with the interchanging of these persons, this re- 
lation also is expressed in dreams by identification. In the dream 
of Irma’s injection I wish to exchange one patient for another — 
that is to say, I wish this other person to be my patient, as the 
former person has been; the dream deals with this wish by 
showing me a person who is called Irma, but who is examined in 
a position such as I have had occasion to see only the other per- 
son occupy. In the dream about my uncle this substitution is 
made the centre of the dream ; I identify myself with the minis- 
ter by judging and treating my colleagues as shabbily as he does. 

It has been my experience — and to this I have found no ex- 
ception— that every dream treats of oneself. Dreams are ab- 


THE DREAM-WORK 


213 

solutely egoistic. 13 In cases where not my ego but only a strange 
person occurs in the dream-content, I may safely assume that 
by means of identification my ego is concealed behind that per- 
son. I am permitted to supplement my ego. On other occasions, 
when my ego appears in the dream, the situation in which it is 
placed tells me that another person is concealing himself, by 
means of identification, behind the ego. In this case I must be 
prepared to find that in the interpretation I should transfer 
something which is connected with this person — the hidden 
common feature — to myself. There are also dreams in which my 
ego appears together with other persons who, when the identifi- 
cation is resolved, once more show themselves to be my ego. 
Through these identifications I shall then have to connect with 
my ego certain ideas to which the censorship has objected. I 
may also give my ego multiple representation in my dream, 
either directly or by means of identification with other peo- 
ple. By means of several such identifications an extraordinary 
amount of thought material may be condensed. 14 That one’s 
ego should appear in the same dream several times or in different 
forms is fundamentally no more surprising than that it should 
appear, in conscious thinking, many times and in different places 
or in different relations: as, for example, in the sentence: “When 
I think what a healthy child I was.” 

Still easier than in the case of persons is the resolution of 
identifications in the case of localities designated by their own 
names, as here the disturbing influence of the all-powerful ego 
is lacking. In one of my dreams of Rome (pp. 97-8) the name of 
the place in which I find myself is Rome; I am surprised, how- 
ever, by a large number of German placards at a street corner. 
This last is a wish-fulfilment, which immediately suggests 
Prague; the wish itself probably originated at a period of my 
youth when I was imbued with a German nationalistic spirit 
which to-day is quite subdued. At the time of my dream I was 

13 Cf. here the observations made on pp. i66ff. 

14 If I do not know behind which of the persons appearing in the dream I 
am to look for my ego, I observe the following rule: That person in the 
dream who is subject to an emotion which I am aware of while asleep is 
the one that conceals my ego. 



214 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

looking forward to meeting a friend in Prague; the identification 
of Rome with Prague is therefore explained by a desired com- 
mon feature; I would rather meet my friend in Rome than in 
Prague; for the purpose of this meeting I should like to exchange 
Prague for Rome. 

The possibility of creating composite formations is one of 
the chief causes of the fantastic character so common in dreams, 
in that it introduces into the dream-content elements which 
could never have been objects of perception. The psychic process 
which occurs in the creation of composite formations is obviously 
the same as that which we employ in conceiving or figuring a 
dragon or a centaur in our waking senses. The only difference 
is that in the fantastic creations of waking life the impression 
intended is itself the decisive factor, while the composite forma- 
tion in the dream is determined by a factor — the common fea- 
ture in the dream-thoughts — which is independent of its form. 
Composite formations in dreams may be achieved in a great 
many different ways. In the most artless of these methods only 
the properties of the one thing are represented, and this repre- 
sentation is accompanied by a knowledge that they refer to an- 
other object also. A more careful technique combines features 
of the one object with those of the other in a new image, while it 
makes skilful use of any really existing resemblances between 
the two objects. The new creation may prove to be wholly ab- 
surd, or even successful as a fantasy, according as the material 
and the wit employed in constructing it may permit. If the ob- 
jects to be condensed into a unity are too incongruous, the 
dream-work is content with creating a composite formation with 
a comparatively distinct nucleus, to which are attached more 
indefinite modifications. The unification into one image has here 
been to some extent unsuccessful; the two representations over- 
lap one another, and give rise to something like a contest be- 
tween the visual images. Similar representations might be ob- 
tained in a drawing if one were to attempt to give form to a 
unified abstraction of disparate perceptual images. 

Dreams naturally abound in such composite formations; I 
have given several examples of these in the dreams already 
analysed, and will now cite more such examples. In the dream 


THE DREAM-WORK 


215 

on p. 205, which describes the career of my patient “in flowery 
language,” the dream-ego carries a spray of blossom in her hand 
which, as we have seen, signifies at once sexual innocence and 
sexual transgression. Moreover, from the manner in which the 
blossoms are set on, they recall cherry-blossom; the blossoms 
themselves, considered singly, are camellias , and finally the 
whole spray gives the dreamer the impression of an exotic plant. 
The common feature in the elements of this composite forma- 
tion is revealed by the dream-thoughts. The blossoming spray 
is made up of allusions to presents by which she was induced or 
was to have been induced to behave in a manner agreeable to 
the giver. So it was with cherries in her childhood, and with a 
camellia-tree in her later years; the exotic character is an allusion 
to a much-travelled naturalist, who sought to win her favour by 
means of a drawing of a flower. Another female patient con- 
trives a composite meaning out of bathing machines at a seaside 
resort, country privies , and the attics of our city dwelling-houses. 
A reference to human nakedness and exposure is common to 
the first two elements; and we may infer from their connection 
with the third element that (in her childhood) the garret was 
likewise the scene of bodily exposure. A dreamer of the male 
sex makes a composite locality out of two places in which 
“treatment” is given — my office and the assembly rooms in 
which he first became acquainted with his wife. Another, a 
female patient, after her elder brother has promised to regale 
her with caviare, dreams that his legs are covered all over with 
black beads of caviare . The two elements, “taint” in a moral 
sense and the recollection of a cutaneous eruption in childhood 
which made her legs look as though studded over with red in- 
stead of black spots, have here been combined with the beads of 
caviare to form a new idea — the idea of " what she gets from her 
brother” In this dream parts of the human body are treated as 
objects, as is usually the case in dreams. In one of the dreams 
recorded by Ferenczi there occurs a composite formation made 
up of the person of a physician and a horse, and this composite 
being wears a nightshirt. The common feature in these three 
components was revealed in the analysis, after the nightshirt 
bad been recognized as an allusion to the father of the dreamer 


216 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


in a scene of childhood. In each of the three cases there was 
some object of her sexual curiosity. As a child she had often 
been taken by her nurse to the army stud, where she had the 
amplest opportunity to satisfy her curiosity, at that time still 
uninhibited. 

I have already stated that the dream has no means of express- 
ing the relation of contradiction, contrast, negation. I shall now 
contradict this assertion for the first time. A certain number of 
cases of what may be summed up under the word “contrast” 
obtain representation, as we have seen, simply by means of 
identification — that is, when an exchange, a substitution, can 
be bound up with the contrast. Of this we have cited repeated 
examples. Certain other of the contrasts in the dream-thoughts, 
which perhaps come under the category of “inverted, turned into 
the opposite ” are represented in dreams in the following re- 
markable manner, which may almost be described as witty. The 
“inversion” does not itself make its way into the dream-content, 
but manifests its presence in the material by the fact that a part 
of the already formed dream-content which is, for other reasons, 
closely connected in context is — as it were subsequently — in- 
verted, It is easier to illustrate this process than to describe it. 
In the beautiful “Up and Down” dream (p. 181) the dream- 
representation of ascending is an inversion of its prototype in 
the dream- thoughts: that is, of the introductory scene of Daudet’s 
Sappho ; in the dream climbing is difficult at first and easy later 
on, whereas in the novel it is easy at first, and later becomes 
more and more difficult. Again, “above” and “below,” with ref- 
erence to the dreamer’s brother, are reversed in the dream. This 
points to a relation of inversion or contrast between two parts of 
the material in the dream-thoughts, which indeed we found in 
them, for in the childish phantasy of the dreamer he is carried 
by his nurse, while in the novel, on the contrary, the hero car- 
ries his beloved. My dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. (to 
be cited later) likewise contains an inversion of this sort, which 
must be set right before the dream can be interpreted. In this 
dream Goethe attacks a young man, Herr M.; the reality, as 
contained in the dream-thoughts, is that an eminent man, a 
friend of mine, has been attacked by an unknown young author. 



THE DREAM- WORK 


217 

In the dream I reckon time from the date of Goethe’s death; in 
reality the reckoning was made from the year in which the 
paralytic was born. The thought which influences the dream- 
material reveals itself as my opposition to the treatment of 
Goethe as though he were a lunatic. “It is the other way about,” 
says the dream; “if you don’t understand the book it is you who 
are feeble-minded, not the author.” All these dreams of inver- 
sion, moreover, seem to me to imply an allusion to the contemp- 
tuous phrase, ‘to turn one’s back upon a person” (German: 
einem die Kehrseite zeigen, lit. to show a person one’s backside) : 
cf . the inversion in respect of the dreamer’s brother in the Sappho 
dream. It is further worth noting how frequently inversion is 
employed in precisely those dreams which are inspired by re- 
pressed homosexual impulses. 

Moreover, inversion, or transformation into the opposite, is 
one of the most favoured and most versatile methods of repre- 
sentation which the dream-work has at its disposed. It serves, 
in the first place, to enable the wish-fulfilment to prevail against 
a definite element of the dream-thoughts. “If only it were the 
other way about!” is often the best expression for the reaction 
of the ego against a disagreeable recollection. But inversion be- 
comes extraordinarily useful in the service of the censorship, for 
it effects, in the material to be represented, a degree of distortion 
which at first simply paralyses our understanding of the dream. 
It is therefore always permissible, if a dream stubbornly refuses 
to surrender its meaning, to venture on the experimental inver- 
sion of definite portions of its manifest content. Then, not in- 
frequently, everything becomes clear. 

Besides the inversion of content, the temporal inversion must 
not be overlooked. A frequent device of dream-distortion con- 
sists in presenting the final issue of the event or the conclusion 
of the train of thought at the beginning of the dream, and ap- 
pending at the end of the dream the premises of the conclusion, 
or the causes of the event. Anyone who forgets this technical de- 
vice of dream-distortion stands helpless before the problem of 
dream-interpretation . 13 

15 The hysterical attack often employs the same device of temporal inver- 
sion in order to conceal its meaning from the observer. The attack of a 



2l8 the interpretation of dreams 

In many cases, indeed, we discover the meaning of the dream 
only when we have subjected the dream-content to a multiple in- 
version, in accordance with the different relations. For example, 
in the dream of a young patient who is suffering from obsessional 
neurosis, the memory of the childish death-wish directed against 
a dreaded father concealed itself behind the following words: 
His father scolds him because he comes home so late , but the 
context of the psychoanalytic treatment and the impressions of 
the dreamer show that the sentence must be read as follows: He 
is angry with his father , and further, that his father always 
came home too early (i.e. too soon). He would have preferred 
that his father should not come home at all, which is identical 
with the wish (see p. 152 ff.) that his father would die. As a little 
boy, during the prolonged absence of his father, the dreamer 
was guilty of a sexual aggression against another child, and was 
punished by the threat: “Just you wait until your father comes 
home!” 

If we should seek to trace the relations between the dream- 
content and the dream-thoughts a little farther, we shall do this 
best by making the dream itself our point of departure, and 
asking ourselves: What do certain formal characteristics of the 
dream-presentation signify in relation to the dream-thoughts? 
First and foremost among the formal characteristics which are 
bound to impress us in dreams are the differences in the sensory 
intensity of the single dream-images, and in the distinctness of 
various parts of the dream, or of whole dreams as compared with 
one another. The differences in the intensity of individual dream- 


hysterical girl, for example, consists in enacting a little romance, which she 
has imagined in the unconscious in connection with an encounter in a tram. 
A man, attracted by the beauty of her foot, addresses her while she is read- 
ing, whereupon she goes with him and a passionate love-scene ensues. Her 
attack begins with the representation of this scene by writhing movements 
of the body (accompanied by movements of the lips and folding of the arms 
to signify kisses and embraces) , whereupon she hurries into the next room, 
sits down on a chair, lifts her skirt in order to show her foot, acts as though 
she were about to read a book, and speaks to me (answers me). Cf. the 
observation of Artemidorus: “In interpreting dream-stories one must con- 
sider them the first time from the beginning to the end, and the second tim e 
from the end to the beginning.” 


THE DREAM-WORK. 


219 

images cover the whole gamut, from a sharpness of definition 
which one is inclined — although without warrant — to rate more 
highly than that of reality, to a provoking indistinctness which 
we declare to be characteristic of dreams, because it really is 
not wholly comparable to any of the degrees of indistinctness 
which we occasionally perceive in real objects. Moreover, we 
usually describe the impression which we receive of an indistinct 
object in a dream as “fleeting, 1 ” while we think of the more dis- 
tinct dream-images as having been perceptible also for a longer 
period of time. We must now ask ourselves by what conditions 
in the dream-material these differences in the distinctness of 
the individual portions of the dream-content are brought about. 

Before proceeding farther, it is necessary to deal with certain 
expectations which seem to be almost inevitable. Since actual 
sensations experienced during sleep may constitute part of the 
dream-material, it will probably be assumed that these sensa- 
tions, or the dream-elements resulting from them, are emphasized 
by a special intensity, or conversely, that anything which is 
particularly vivid in the dream can probably be traced to such 
real sensations during sleep. My experience, however, has never 
confirmed this. It is not true that those elements of a dream 
which are derivatives of real impressions perceived in sleep 
(nerve stimuli) are distinguished by their special vividness from 
others which are based on memories. The factor of reality is in- 
operative in determining the intensity of dream-images. 

Further, it might be expected that the sensory intensity 
(vividness) of single dream-images is in proportion to the 
psychic intensity of the elements corresponding to them in the 
dream-thoughts. In the latter, intensity is identical with psychic 
value; the most intense elements are in fact the most significant, 
and these constitute the central point of the dream-thoughts. 
We know, however, that it is precisely these elements which are 
usually not admitted to the dream-content, owing to the vigi- 
lance of the censorship. Still, it might be possible for their most 
immediate derivatives, which represent them in the dream, to 
reach a higher degree of intensity without, however, for that 
reason constituting the central point of the dream-representa- 
tion. This assumption also vanishes as soon as we compare the 



220 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

dream and the dream-material. The intensity of the elements 
in the one has nothing to do with the intensity of the elements 
in the other; as a matter of fact, a complete “ transvaluation of 
all psychic values ” takes place between the dream-material and 
the dream. The very element of the dream which is transient 
and hazy, and screened by more vigorous images, is often dis- 
covered to be the one and only direct derivative of the topic 
that completely dominates the dream-thoughts. 

The intensity of the dream-elements proves to be determined 
in a different manner: that is, by two factors which are mutually 
independent. It will readily be understood that those elements 
by means of which the wish-fulfilment expresses itself are those 
which are intensely represented. But analysis tells us that from 
the most vivid elements of the dream the greatest number of 
trains of thought proceed, and that those which are most vivid 
are at the same time those which are best determined. No change 
of meaning is involved if we express this latter empirical propo- 
sition in the following formula: The greatest intensity is shown 
by those elements of the dream for whose formation the most 
extensive condensation-work was required. We may, therefore, 
^expect that it will be possible to express this condition, as well 
as the other condition of the wish-fulfilment in a single formula. 

I must utter a warning that the problem which I have just been 
considering — the causes of the greater or lesser intensity or 
distinctness of single elements in dreams — is not to be con- 
founded with the other problem — that of variations in the dis- 
tinctness of whole dreams or sections of dreams. In the former 
case the opposite of distinctness is haziness; in the latter, con- 
fusion. It is, of course, undeniable that in both scales the two 
kinds of intensities rise and fall in unison. A portion of the 
dream which seems clear to us usually contains vivid elements; 
an obscure dream, on the contrary, is composed of less vivid ele- 
ments. But the problem offered by the scale of definition, which 
ranges from the apparently clear to the indistinct or confused, is 
far more complicated than the problem of the fluctuations in 
vividness of the dream-elements. For reasons which will be given 
later, the former cannot at this stage be further discussed* In 


THE DREAM-WORK 


221 


isolated cases one observes, not without surprise, that the im- 
pression of distinctness or indistinctness produced by a dream 
has nothing to do with the dream-structure, but proceeds from 
the dream-material, as one of its ingredients* Thus, for example, 
I remember a dream which on waking seemed so particularly 
well-constructed, flawless and clear that I made up my mind, 
while I was still in a somnolent state, to admit a new category 
of dreams — those which had not been subject to the mechanism 
of condensation and distortion, and which might thus be de- 
scribed as “phantasies during sleep.” A closer examination, 
however, proved that this unusual dream suffered from the same 
structural flaws and breaches as exist in all other dreams; so I 
abandoned the idea of a category of “dream-phantasies .” 16 The 
content of the dream, reduced to its lowest terms, was that I 
was expounding to a friend a difficult and long-sought theory of 
bisexuality, and the wish-fulfilling power of the dream was re- 
sponsible for the fact that this theory (which, by the way, was 
not communicated in the dream) appeared to be so lucid and 
flawless. Thus, what I believed to be a judgment as regards the 
finished dream was a part, and indeed the most essential part, 
of the dream-content. Here the dream-work reached out, as it 
were, into my first waking thoughts, and presented to me, in the 
form of a judgment of the dream, that part of the dream-mate- 
rial which it had failed to represent with precision in the dream. 
I was once confronted with die exact counterpart of this case by 
a female patient who at first absolutely declined to relate a 
dream which was necessary for the analysis “because it was so 
hazy and confused,” and who finally declared, after repeatedly 
protesting the inaccuracy of her description, that it seemed to 
her that several persons — herself, her husband, and her father 
— had occurred in the dream, and that she had not known 
whether her husband was her father, or who really was her 
father, or something of that sort. Comparison of this dream with 
the ideas which occurred to the dreamer in the course of the 
sitting showed beyond a doubt that it dealt with the rather com- 
monplace story of a maidservant who has to confess that she is 
lft I do not know to-day whether I was justified in doing so. 



222 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


expecting a child, and hears doubts expressed as to “who the 
father really is.” 17 The obscurity manifested by this dream, 
therefore, was once more a portion of the dream-exciting mate- 
rial. A fragment of this material was represented in the form of 
the dream. The form of the dream or of dreaming is employed 
with astonishing frequency to represent the concealed content . 

Glosses on the dream, and seemingly harmless comments on 
it, often serve in the most subtle manner to conceal — although, 
of course, they really betray — a part of what is dreamed. As, for 
example, when the dreamer says: Here the dream was wiped out, 
and the analysis gives an infantile reminiscence of listening to 
someone cleaning himself after defecation. Or another example, 
which deserves to be recorded in detail: A'young man has a very 
distinct dream, reminding him of phantasies of his boyhood 
which have remained conscious. He found himself in a hotel at a 
seasonal resort; it was night; he mistook the number of his room, 
and entered a room in which an elderly lady and her two daugh- 
ters were undressing to go to bed. He continues: u Then there 
are some gaps in the dream; something is missing; and at the 
end there was a man in the room, who wanted to throw me out, 
and with whom I had to struggle.” He tries in vain to recall the 
content and intention of the boyish phantasy to which the dream 
obviously alluded. But we finally become aware that the re- 
quired content had already been given in his remarks concerning 
the indistinct part of the dream. The “ c gaps” are the genital 
apertures of the women who are going to bed: “Here something 
is missing” describes the principal characteristic of the female 
genitals. In his young days he burned with curiosity to see the 
female genitals, and was still inclined to adhere to the infantile 
sexual theory which attributes a male organ to women. 

A very similar form was assumed in an analogous reminiscence 
of another dreamer. He dreamed: I go with Frdulein K. into the 
restaurant of the Volksgarten . . . then comes a dark place, an in- 
terruption . . . then I find myself in the salon of a brothel, where 
1 see two or three women, one in a chemise and drawers . 

17 Accompanying hysterical symptoms; amenorrhoea and profound depres- 
sion were the chief troubles of this patient. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


223 

Analysis . — Fraulein K. is the daughter of his former em- 
ployer; as he himself admits, she was a sister-substitute. He 
rarely had the opportunity of talking to her, but they once had 
a conversation in which “one recognized one’s sexuality, so to 
speak, as though one were to say: I am a man and you are a 
woman.” He had been only once to the above-mentioned res- 
taurant, when he was accompanied by the sister of his brother- 
in-law, a girl to whom he was quite indifferent. On another oc- 
casion he accompanied three ladies to the door of the restaurant. 
The ladies were his sister, his sister-in-law, and the girl already 
mentioned. He was perfectly indifferent to all three of them, but 
they all belonged to the “sister category.” He had visited a 
brothel but rarely, perhaps two or three times in his life. 

The interpretation is based on the “dark place,” the “inter- 
ruption” in the dream, and informs us that on occasion, but in 
fact only rarely, obsessed by his boyish curiosity, he had in- 
spected the genitals of his sister, a few years his junior. A few 
days later the misdemeanor indicated in the dream recurred to 
his conscious memory. 

All dreams of the same night belong, in respect of their con- 
tent, to the same whole; their division into several parts, their 
grouping and number, are all full of meaning and may be re- 
garded as pieces of information about the latent dream-thoughts. 
In the interpretation of dreams consisting of several main sec- 
tions, or of dreams belonging to the same night, we must not 
overlook the possibility that these different and successive 
dreams mean the same thing, expressing the same impulses in 
different material. That one of these homologous dreams which 
comes first in time is usually the most distorted and most bash- 
ful, while the next dream is bolder and more distinct. 

Even Pharaoh’s dream of the ears and the kine, which Joseph 
interpreted, was of this kind. It is given by Josephus in greater 
detail than in the Bible. After relating the first dream, the King 
said: “After I had seen this vision I awaked out of my sleep, and, 
being in disorder, and considering with myself what this ap- 
pearance should be, I fell asleep again, and saw another dream 
much more wonderful than the foregoing, which still did more 



224 the interpretation of dreams 

affright and disturb me.” After listening to the relation of the 
dream, Joseph said: “This dream, 0 King, although seen under 
two forms, signifies one and the same event of things.” 18 

Jung, in his Beitrag zur Psyckologie des Geruchtes, relates 
how a veiled erotic dream of a schoolgirl was understood by her 
friends without interpretation, and continued by them with vari- 
ations, and he remarks, with reference to one of these narrated 
dreams, “that the concluding idea of a long series of dream- 
images had precisely the same content as the first image of the 
series had endeavoured to represent. The censorship thrust the 
complex out of the way as long as possible by a constant re- 
newal of symbolic screenings, displacements, transformations 
into something harmless, etc.” Schemer was well acquainted 
with this peculiarity of dream-representation, and describes it 
in his Leben des Traumes in terms of a special law in the Ap- 
pendix to his doctrine of organic stimulation: “But finally, in 
all symbolic dream-formations emanating from definite nerve 
stimuli, the phantasy observes the general law that at the be- 
ginning of the dream it depicts the stimulating object only by 
the remotest and freest allusions, but towards the end, when 
the graphic impulse becomes exhausted, the stimulus itself is 
nakedly represented by its appropriate organ or its function; 
whereupon the dream, itself describing its organic motive, 
achieves its end ” 

A pretty confirmation of this law of Schemer’s has been fur- 
nished by Otto Rank in his essay: Ein Traum, der sick selbst 
deuteL This dream, related to him by a girl, consisted of two 
dreams of the same night, separated by an interval of time, the 
second of which ended with an orgasm. It was possible to inter- 
pret this orgastic dream in detail in spite of the few ideas con- 
tributed by the dreamer, and the wealth of relations between 
the two dream-contents made it possible to recognize that the 
first dream expressed in modest language the same thing as the 
second, so that the latter — the orgastic dream — facilitated a 
full explanation of the former. From this example, Rank very 

18 Josephus j Antiquities of the Jews, book ii, chap, v, t rans . by Win. 
Whiston, David McKay, Philadelphia. 


THE DREAM-WORK 225 

justifiably argues the significance of orgastic dreams for the 
theory of dreams in general. 

But in my experience it is only in rare cases that one is in a 
position to translate the lucidity or confusion of a dream, re- 
spectively, into a certainty or doubt in the dream-material. 
Later on I shall have to disclose a hitherto unmentioned factor 
in dream-formation, upon whose operation this qualitative scale 
in dreams is essentially dependent. 

In many dreams in which a certain situation and environment 
are preserved for some time, there occur interruptions which 
may be described in the following words: “But then it seemed 
as though it were, at the same time, another place, and there 
such and such a thing happened.” In these cases what interrupts 
the main action of the dream, which after a while may be con- 
tinued again, reveals itself in the dream-material as a sub- 
ordinate clause, an interpolated thought. Conditionality in the 
dream-thoughts is represented by simultaneity in the dream- 
content ( wenn or wann = if or when, while) . 

We may now ask, What is the meaning of the sensation of in- 
hibited movement which so often occurs in dreams, and is so 
closely allied to anxiety? One wants to move, and is unable to 
stir from the spot; or wants to accomplish something, and en- 
counters obstacle after obstacle. The train is about to start, and 
one cannot reach it; one’s hand is raised to avenge an insult, 
and its strength fails, etc. We have already met with this sensa- 
tion in exhibition-dreams, but have as yet made no serious at- 
tempt to interpret it. It is convenient, but inadequate, to answer 
that there is motor paralysis in sleep, which manifests itself by 
means of the sensation alluded to. We may ask: “Why is it, then, 
that we do not dream continually of such inhibited movements?” 
And we may permissibly suspect that this sensation, which may 
at any time occur during sleep, serves some sort of purpose for 
representation, and is evoked only when the need of this repre- 
sentation is present in the dream-material. 

Inability to do a thing does not always appear in the dream 
as a sensation; it may appear simply as part of the dream-con- 
tent. I think one case of this kind is especially fitted to enlighten 



226 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


us as to the meaning of this peculiarity. I shall give an abridged 
version of a dream in which I seem to be accused of dishonesty. 
The scene is a mixture made up oj a private sanatorium and sev- 
eral other places . A manservant appears , to summon me to an 
inquiry . 1 know in the dream that something has been missed , 
and that the inquiry is taking place because I am suspected of 
having appropriated the lost article . Analysis shows that inquiry 
is to be taken in two senses ; it includes the meaning of medical 
examination . Being conscious of my innocence , and my position 
as consultant in this sanatorium , I calmly follow the manservant. 
We are received at the door by another manservant who says, 
pointing at me, “Have you brought him? Why, he is a respectable 
man ” Thereupon, and unattended, I enter a great hall where 
there are many machines, which reminds me of an inferno with 
its hellish instruments of punishment . I see a colleague strapped 
to an appliance; he has every reason to be interested in my ap- 
pearance, but he takes no notice of me. I understand that I may 
now go. Then I cannot find my hat, and cannot go after all . 

The wish that the dream fulfils is obviously the wish that my 
honesty shall be acknowledged, and that I may be permitted to 
go; there must therefore be all sorts of material in the dream- 
thoughts which comprise a contradiction of this wish. The fact 
that I may go is the sign of my absolution; if, then, the dream 
provides at its close an event which prevents me from going, 
we may readily conclude that the suppressed material of the 
contradiction is asserting itself in this feature. The fact that I 
cannot find my hat therefore means: “You are not after all an 
honest man.” The inability to do something in the dream is the 
expression of a contradiction, a “No” ; so that our earlier asser- 
tion, to the effect that the dream is not capable of expressing a 
negation, must be revised accordingly. 19 

19 A reference to an experience of childhood emerges, in the complete 
analysis, through the following connecting-links: “The Moor has done his 
duty, the Moor can go.” And then follows the waggish question: “How old 
is the Moor when he has done his duty?” — “A year, then he can go 
(walk) .” (It is said that I came into the world with so much black curly 
hair that my mother declared that I was a little Moor.) The fact that I 
cannot find my hat is an experience of the day which has been exploited in 
various senses. Our servant, who is a genius at stowing things away, had 


THE DREAM-WORK 


227 

In other dreams in which the inability to do something occurs, 
not merely as a situation v but also as a sensation, the same con- 
tradiction is more emphatically expressed by the sensation of 
inhibited movement, or a will to which a counter-will is opposed. 
Thus the sensation of inhibited movement represents a conflict 
of will. We shall see later on that this very motor paralysis dur- 
ing sleep is one of the fundamental conditions of the psychic 
process which functions during dreaming. Now an impulse which 
is conveyed to the motor system is none other than the will, and 
the fact that we are certain that this impulse will be inhibited in 
sleep makes the whole process extraordinarily well-adapted to 
the representation of a will towards something and of a “No” 
which opposes itself thereto. From my explanation of anxiety, 
it is easy to understand why the sensation of the inhibited will 
is so closely allied to anxiety, and why it is so often connected 
with it in dreams. Anxiety is a libidinal impulse which emanates 
from the unconscious and is inhibited by the preconscious . 20 
Therefore, when a sensation of inhibition in the dream is ac- 
companied by anxiety, the dream must be concerned with a 
volition which was at one time capable of arousing libido; there 
must be a sexual impulse. 

As for the judgment which is often expressed during a dream: 
“Of course, it is only a dream,” and the psychic force to which 
it may be ascribed, I shall discuss these questions later on. For 
the present I will merely say that they are intended to depreciate 
the importance of what is being dreamed. The interesting prob- 
lem allied to this, as to what is meant if a certain content in the 
dream is characterized in the dream itself as having been 
“dreamed” — the riddle of a “dream within a dream” — has been 
solved in a similar sense by W. Stekel, by the analysis of some 
convincing examples. Here again the part of the dream 
“dreamed” is to be depreciated in value and robbed of its 
reality; that which the dreamer continues to dream after waking 

hidden the hat. A rejection of melancholy thoughts of death is concealed 
behind the conclusion of the dream: “I have not nearly done my duty yet; 
I cannot go yet,” Birth and death together — as in the dream of Goethe and 
the paralytic, which was a little earlier in date. 

20 This theory is not in accordance with more recent views. 



228 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


from the “dream within a dream” is what the dream-wish de- 
sires to put in place of the obliterated reality. It may therefore 
be assumed that the part “dreamed” contains the representation 
of the reality, the real memory, while, on the other hand, the 
continued dream contains the representation of what the dreamer 
merely wishes. The inclusion of a certain content in “a dream 
within a dream” is therefore equivalent to the wish that what 
has been characterized as a dream had never occurred. In other 
words: when a particular incident is represented by the dream- 
work in a “dream,” it signifies the strongest confirmation of the 
reality of this incident, the most emphatic affirmation of it. The 
dream-work utilizes the dream itself as a form of repudiation, 
and thereby confirms the theory that a dream is a wish-ful- 
filment. 


D. REGARD FOR REPRESENTABILITY 

We have hitherto been concerned with investigating the manner 
in which our dreams represent the relations between the dream- 
thoughts, but we have often extended our inquiry to the further 
question as to what alterations the dream-material itself under- 
goes for the purposes of dream-formation. We now know that 
the dream-material, after being stripped of a great many of its 
relations, is subjected to compression, while at the same time 
displacements of the intensity of its elements enforce a psychic 
transvaluation of this material. The displacements which we 
have considered were shown to be substitutions of one particu- 
lar idea for another, in some way related to the original by its 
associations, and the displacements were made to facilitate the 
condensation, inasmuch as in this manner, instead of two ele- 
ments, a common mean between them found its way into the 
dream. So far no mention has been made of any other kind of 
displacement. But we learn from the analyses that displacement 
of another kind does occur, and that it manifests itself in an 
exchange of the verbal expression for the thought in question. In 
both cases we are dealing with a displacement along a chain of 
associations, but the same process takes place in different psychic 
spheres, and the result of this displacement in the one case is 


THE DREAM-WORK 229 

that one element is replaced by another, while in the other case 
an element exchanges its verbal shape for another. 

This second kind of displacement occurring in dream-forma- 
tion is not only of great theoretical interest, but is also peculiarly 
well-fitted to explain the appearance of phantastic absurdity in 
which dreams disguise themselves. Displacement usually occurs 
in such a way that a colourless and abstract expression of the' 
dream-thought is exchanged for one that is pictorial and con- 
crete. The advantage, and along with it the purpose, of this sub- 
stitution is obvious. Whatever is pictorial is capable oj repre- 
sentation in dreams and can be fitted into a situation in which 
abstract expression would confront the dream-representation 
with difficulties not unlike those which would arise if a political 
leading article had to be represented in an illustrated journal. 
Not only the possibility of representation, but also the interests 
of condensation and of the censorship, may be furthered by 
this exchange. Once the abstractly expressed and unserviceable 
dream-thought is translated into pictorial language, those con- 
tacts and identities between this new expression and the rest of 
the dream-material which are required by the dream-work, and 
which it contrives whenever they are not available, are more 
readily provided, since in every language concrete terms, owing 
to their evolution, are richer in associations than are abstract 
terms. It may be imagined that a good part of the intermediate 
work in dream-formation, which seeks to reduce the separate 
dream-thoughts to the tersest and most unified expression in the 
dream, is effected in this manner, by fitting paraphrases of the 
various thoughts. The one thought whose mode of expression 
has perhaps been determined by other factors will therewith 
exert a distributive and selective influence on the expressions 
available for the others, and it may even do this from the very 
start, just as it would in the creative activity of a poet. When a 
poem is to be written in rhymed couplets, the second rhyming 
line is bound by two conditions: it must express the meaning 
allotted to it, and its expression must permit of a rhyme with 
the first line. The best poems are, of course, those in which one 
does not detect the effort to find a rhyme, and in which both 
thoughts have as a matter of course, by mutual induction, se- 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


230 

lected the verbal expression which, with a little subsequent ad- 
justment, will permit of the rhymer 

In some cases the change of expression serves the purposes of 
dream-condensation more directly, in that it provides an ar- 
rangement of words which, being ambiguous, permits of the 
expression of more than one of the dream-thoughts. The whole 
range of verbal wit is thus made to serve the purpose of the 
dream-work. The part played by words in dream-formation 
ought not to surprise us. A word, as the point of junction of a 
number of ideas, possesses, as it were, a predestined ambiguity, 
and the neuroses (obsessions, phobias) take advantage of the 
opportunities for condensation and disguise afforded by words 
quite as eagerly as do dreams. 21 That dream-distortion also 
profits by this displacement of expression may be readily dem- 
onstrated. It is indeed confusing if one ambiguous word is sub- 
stituted for two with single meanings, and the replacement of 
sober, everyday language by a plastic mode of expression baffles 
our understanding, especially since a dream never tells us 
whether the elements presented by it are to be interpreted lit- 
erally or metaphorically, whether they refer to the dream-ma- 
terial directly, or only by means of interpolated expressions. Gen- 
erally speaking, in the interpretation of any element of a dream 
It is doubtful whether it 

(а) is to be accepted in the negative or the positive sense 
(contrast relation) ; 

(б) is to be interpreted historically (as a memory) ; 

(c) is symbolic; or whether 

( d ) its valuation is to be based upon its wording. 

In spite of this versatility, we may say that the representation 
effected by the dream-work, which was never even intended to 
be understood, does not impose upon the translator any greater 
difficulties than those that the ancient writers of hieroglyphics 
imposed upon their readers. 

I have already given several examples of dream-representa- 
tions which are held together only by ambiguity of expression 
Zl Cf. Wit and its Relation to the Unconscious . 


THE DREAM-WORK 


231 

(“her mouth opens without difficulty,” in the dream of Inna's 
injection; “I cannot go yet after all,” in the last dream related, 
etc.) . I shall now cite a dream in the analysis of which plastic 
representation of the abstract thoughts plays a greater part. 
The difference between such dream-interpretation and the inter- 
pretation by means of symbols may nevertheless be clearly de- 
fined; in the symbolic interpretation of dreams the key to the 
symbolism is selected arbitrarily by the interpreter, while in 
our own cases of verbal disguise these keys are universally known 
and are taken from established modes of speech. Provided one 
hits on the right idea on the right occasion, one may solve dreams 
of this kind, either completely or in part, independently of any 
statements made by the dreamer. 

A lady, a friend of mine, dreams: She is at the opera . It is a 
Wagnerian performance , which has lasted until 7.45 in the morn- 
ing. In the stalls and pit there are tables , at which people are 
eating and drinking. Her cousin and his young wife , who have 
just returned from their honeymoon , are sitting at one of these 
tables; beside them is a member of the aristocracy . The young 
wife is said to have brought him back with her from the honey- 
moon quite openly, just as she might have brought back a hat . 
In the middle of the stalls there is a high tower ; on the top of 1 
which there is a platform surrounded by an iron railing . There, 
high overhead, stands the conductor, with the features of Hans 
Richter , continually running round behind the railing, perspiring 
terribly; and from this position he is conducting the orchestra, 
which is arranged round the base of the tower . She herself is sit- 
ting in a box with a friend of her own sex (known to me). Her 
younger sister tries to hand her up, from the stalls, a large lump 
of coal, alleging that she had not known that it would be so long, 
and that she must by this time be miserably cold . (. 4 $ though the 
boxes ought to have been heated during the long performance .) 

Although in other respects the dream gives a good picture of 
the situation, it is, of course, nonsensical enough: the tower in 
the middle of the stalls, from which the conductor leads the 
orchestra, and above all the coal which her sister hands up to 
her. I purposely asked for no analysis of this dream. With some 
knowledge of the personal relations of the dreamer, I was able 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


232 

to interpret parts of it independently of her. I knew that she had 
felt intense sympathy for a musician whose career had been 
prematurely brought to an end by insanity. I therefore decided 
to take the tower in the stalls verbally . It then emerged that 
the man whom she wished to see in the place of Hans Richter 
towered above all the other members of the orchestra. This tower 
must be described as a composite formation by means of apposi- 
tion; by its substructure it represents the greatness of the man, 
but by the railing at the top, behind which he runs round like a 
prisoner or an animal in a cage (an allusion to the name of the 
unfortunate man ), 22 it represents his later fate. “Lunatic-tower” 
is perhaps the expression in which the two thoughts might have 
met. 

Now that we have discovered the dream's method of repre- 
sentation, we may try, with the same key, to unlock the meaning 
of the second apparent absurdity, that of the coal which her 
sister hands up to the dreamer, “Coal” should mean “secret 
love.” 


“No fire, no coal so hotly glows 

“As the secret love of which no one knows.” 

She and her friend remain seated while her younger sister, who 
still has a prospect of marrying, hands her up the coal “because 
she did not know that it would be so long ” What would be so 
long is not told in the dream. If it were an anecdote, we should 
say “the performance”; but in the dream we may consider the 
sentence as it is, declare it to be ambiguous, and add “before she 
married.” The interpretation “secret love” is then confirmed by 
the mention of the cousin who is sitting with his wife in the stalls, 
and by the open love-affair attributed to the latter. The con- 
trasts between secret and open love, between the dreamer's fire 
and the coldness of the young wife, dominate the dream. More- 
over, here once again there is a person “in a high position” as a 
middle term between the aristocrat and the musician who is 
justified in raising high hopes. 

22 Hugo Wolf. 

25 [The German "sitzen geblieben” is often applied to women who have not 
succeeded in getting married.— Trans.] 


THE DREAM-WORK 


233 

In the above analysis we have at last brought to light a third 
factor, whose part in the transformation of the dream-thoughts 
into the dream-content is by no means trivial: namely, consid- 
eration of the suitability of the dream-thoughts for representa- 
tion in the particular psychic material of which the dream makes 
use — that is, for the most part in visual images. Among the vari- 
ous subordinate ideas associated with the essential dream- 
thoughts, those will be prefered which permit of visual repre- 
sentation, and the dream-work does not hesitate to recast the 
intractable thoughts into another verbal form, even though this 
is a more unusual form, provided it makes representation pos- 
sible, and thus puts an end to the psychological distress caused 
by strangulated thinking. This pouring of the thought-content 
into another mould may at the same time serve the work of con- 
densation, and may establish relations with another thought 
which otherwise would not have been established. It is even pos- 
sible that this second thought may itself have previously changed 
its original expression for the purpose of meeting the first one 
half-way. 

Herbert Silberer 24 has described a good method of directly 
observing the transformation of thoughts into images which 
occurs in dream-formation, and has thus made it possible to study 
in isolation this one factor of the dream-work. If while in a state 
of fatigue and somnolence he imposed upon himself a mental 
effort, it frequently happened that the thought escaped him, and 
in its place there appeared a picture in which he could recognize 
the substitute for the thought. Not quite appropriately, Silberer 
described this substitution as “auto-symbolic.” I shall cite here 
a few examples from Silberer’s work, and on account of certain 
peculiarities of the phenomena observed I shall refer to the sub- 
ject later on. 

“Example 1. — I remember that I have to correct a halting 
passage in an essay. 

“Symbol. — I see myself planing a piece of wood. 

“Example 5. — I endeavour to call to mind the aim of certain 
metaphysical studies which I am proposing to undertake. 

“This aim, I reflect, consists in working one’s way through, 
24 Bleuler-Freud Jahrbuch, i, 1909. 


234 the interpretation of dreams 

while seeking for the basis of existence, to ever higher forms of 
consciousness or levels of being. 

“Symbol . — I run a long knife under a cake as though to take 
a slice out of it. 

“Interpretation.— My movement with the knife signifies 
‘working one’s way through/ . . . The explanation of the basis 
of the symbolism is as follows: At table it devolves upon me now 
and again to cut and distribute a cake, a business which I per- 
form with a long, flexible knife, and which necessitates a certain 
amount of care. In particular, the neat extraction of the cut 
slices of cake presents a certain amount of difficulty; the knife 
must be carefully pushed under the slices in question (the slow 
‘working one’s way through’ in order to get to the bottom). But 
there is yet more symbolism in the picture. The cake of the 
symbol was really a ‘dobos-cake’ — that is, a cake in which the 
knife has to cut through several layers (the levels of conscious- 
ness and thought). 

“ Example 9. — I lost the thread in a train of thought. I make 
an effort to find it again, but I have to recognize that the point 
of departure has completely escaped me. 

“Symbol . — Part of a form of type, the last lines of which have 
fallen out.” 

In view of the part played by witticisms, puns, quotations, songs, 
and proverbs in the intellectual life of educated persons, it would 
be entirely in accordance with our expectations to find disguises 
of this sort used with extreme frequency in the representation 
of the dream-thoughts. Only in the case of a few types of ma- 
terial has a generally valid dream-symbolism established itself 
on the basis of generally known allusions and verbal equivalents. 
A good part of this symbolism, however, is common to the psy- 
choneuroses, legends, and popular usages as well as to dreams. 

In fact, if we look more closely into the matter, we must recog- 
nize that in employing this kind of substitution the dream-work 
is doing nothing at all original. For the achievement of its pur- 
pose, which in this case is representation without interference 
from the censorship, it simply follows the paths which it finds 
already marked out in unconscious thinking, and gives the prefer- 


THE DSEAM-WORK 


*35 

ence to those transformations of the repressed material which 
are permitted to become conscious also in the form of witticisms 
and allusions, and with which all the phantasies of neurotics 
are replete. Here we suddenly begin to understand the dream- 
interpretations of Schemer, whose essential correctness I have 
vindicated elsewhere. The preoccupation of the imagination with 
one’s own body is by no means peculiar to or characteristic of 
the dream alone. My analyses have shown me that it is con- 
stantly found in the unconscious thinking of neurotics, and may 
be traced back to sexual curiosity, whose object, in the adoles- 
cent youth or maiden, is the genitals of the opposite sex, or even 
of the same sex. But, as Schemer and Volkelt very truly insist, 
the house does not constitute the only group of ideas which is 
employed for the symbolization of the body, either in dreams or 
in the unconscious phantasies of neurosis. To be sure, I know 
patients who have steadily adhered to an architectural symbol- 
ism for the body and the genitals (sexual interest, of course, ex- 
tends far beyond the region of the external genital organs) — 
patients for whom posts and pillars signify legs (as in the Song 
of Songs ) , to whom every door suggests a bodily aperture 
(‘‘hole”), and every waterpipe the urinary system, and so on. 
But the groups of ideas appertaining to plant-life, or to the 
kitchen, are just as often chosen to conceal sexual images ; 25 in 
respect of the former everyday language, the sediment of imag- 
inative comparisons dating from the remotest times, has abun- 
dantly paved the way (the “vineyard” of the Lord, the “seed” of 
Abraham, the “garden” of the maiden in the Song of Songs). 
The ugliest as well as the most intimate details of sexual life may 
be thought or dreamed of in apparently innocent allusions to 
culinary operations, and the symptoms of hysteria will become 
absolutely unintelligible if we forget that sexual symbolism may 
conceal itself behind the most commonplace and inconspicuous 
matters as its safest hiding-place. That some neurotic children 
cannot look at blood and raw meat, that they vomit at the 
sight of eggs and macaroni, and that the dread of snakes, which 

25 A mass of corroborative material may be found in the three supple- 
mentary volumes of Edward Fuchs’s lUustrierte Sittengeschichte; privately 
printed by A. Lange, Munich. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF BREAMS 


236 

is natural to mankind, is monstrously exaggerated in neurotics 
— all this has a definite sexual meaning. Wherever the neurosis 
employs a disguise of this sort, it treads the paths once trodden 
by the whole of humanity in the early stages of civilization — 
paths to whose thinly veiled existence our idiomatic expressions, 
proverbs, superstitions, and customs testify to this day. 

I here insert the promised “flower-dream 55 of a female patient, 
in which I shall print in Roman type everything which is to be 
sexually interpreted. This beautiful dream lost all its charm for 
the dreamer once it had been interpreted. 

( 1 a ) Preliminary dream: She goes to the two maids in the 
kitchen and scolds them for taking so long to prepare “a little bite 
of food ” She also sees a very large number of heavy kitchen 
utensils in the kitchen, heaped into piles and turned upside down 
in order to drain . Later addition: The two maids go to fetch 
water, and have , as it were, to climb into a river which reaches 
up to the house or into the courtyard 26 

(b) Main dream : 27 She is descending from a height 28 over 
curiously constructed railings , or a fence which is composed of 
large square trellis-work hurdles with small square apertures , 29 
It is really not adapted for climbing; she is constantly afraid that 
she cannot find a place for her foot, and she is glad that her dress 
doesn’t get caught anywhere, and that she is able to climb down 
it so respectably . 30 As she climbs she is carrying a big branch 
in her hand ? 1 really like a tree, which is thickly studded with 
red flowers; a spreading branch, with many twigs ? 2 With this is 

26 For the interpretation of this preliminary dream, which is to be regarded 
as “causal,” see p, 205. 

27 Her career. 

28 Exalted origin, the wish-contrast to the preliminary dream. 

22 A composite formation, which unites two localities, the so-called garret 
(German: Boden = floor, garret) of her father’s house, in which she used 
to play with her brother, the object of her later phantasies, and the farm 
of a malicious uncle, who used to tease her. 

30 Wish- contrast to an actual memory of her uncle’s farm, to the effect that 
she used to expose herself while she was asleep. 

81 Just as the angel bears a lily-stem in the Ajmuntiation. 

32 For the explanation of this composite formation, see p. 209; innocence, 
menstruation, La Dame aux Camillas. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


237 

connected the idea 0} cherry-blossoms (Bliiten = flowers) , but 
they look like fully opened camellias, which of course do not 
grow on trees . As she is descending , she first has one, then sud- 
denly two, and then again only one? z When she has reached the 
ground the lower flowers have already begun to fall. Now that she 
has reached the bottom she sees an “ odd man ” who is combing — 
as she woidd like to put it — just such a tree, that is, with a piece 
of wood he is scraping thick bunches of hair from it, which hang 
from it like moss . Other men have chopped off such branches in a 
garden, and have flung them into the road, where they are lying 
about, so that a number of people take some of them . But she 
asks whether this is right, whether she may take one, too ?* In 
the garden there stands a young man ( he is a foreigner, and known 
to her) toward whom she goes in order to ask him how it is pos- 
sible to transplant such branches in her own garden . 35 He em- 
braces her, whereupon she struggles and asks him what he is 
thinking of, whether it is permissible to embrace her in such a 
manner . He says there is nothing wrong in it, that it is per- 
mitted?* He then declares himself willing to go with her into the 
other garden, in order to show her how to put them in, and he 
says something to her which she does not quite understand: u Be- 
sides this I need three metres {later she says: square metres) or 
three fathoms of ground” It seems as though he were asking her 
for something in return for his willingness, as though he had the 
intention of indemnifying (reimbursing) himself in her garden, 
as though he wanted to evade some law or other, to derive some 
advantage from it without causing her an injury . She does not 
know whether or not he really shows her anything , , 

The above dream, which has been given prominence on ac- 
count of its symbolic elements, may be described as a “biographi- 

33 Referring to the plurality of the persons who serve her phantasies. 

34 Whether it is permissible to masturbate. [" Sich einen herunterreissen” 
means “to pull off” and colloquially “to masturbate.” — [Trans.] 

35 The branch {Ast ) has long been used to represent the male organ, and, 
moreover, contains a very distinct allusion to the family name of the 
dreamer. 

86 Refers to matrimonial precautions, as does that which immediately fol- 
lows. 



238 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

cal” dream. Such dreams occur frequently in psychoanalysis, but 
perhaps only rarely outside it . 37 

I have, of course, an abundance of such material, but to re- 
produce it here would lead us too far into the consideration of 
neurotic conditions. Everything points to the same conclusion, 
namely, that we need not assume that any special symbolizing 
activity of the psyche is operative in dream-formation; that, on 
the contrary, the dream makes use of such symbolizations as are 
to be found ready-made in unconscious thinking, since these, by 
reason of their ease of representation, and for the most part by 
reason of their being exempt from the censorship, satisfy more 
effectively the requirements of dream-formation. 

E. REPRESENTATION IN DREAMS BY SYMBOLS: SOME FURTHER 
TYPICAL DREAMS 

The analysis of the last biographical dream shows that I recog- 
nized the symbolism in dreams from the very outset. But it was 
only little by little that I arrived at a full appreciation of its 
extent and significance, as the result of increasing experience, 
and under the influence of the works of W. Stekel, concerning 
which I may here fittingly say something. 

This author, who has perhaps injured psychoanalysis as much 
as he has benefited it, produced a large number of novel sym- 
bolic translations, to which no credence was given at first, but 
most of which were later confirmed and had to be accepted. 
Stekel’s services are in no way belittled by the remark that the 
sceptical reserve with which these symbols were received was 
not unjustified. For the examples upon which he based his inter- 
pretations were often unconvincing, and, moreover, he employed 
a method which must be rejected as scientifically unreliable. 
Stekel found his symbolic meanings by way of intuition, by vir- 
tue of his individual faculty of immediately understanding the 
symbols. But such an art cannot be generally assumed; its effi- 
ciency is immune from criticism, and its results have therefore 
no claim to credibility. It is as though one were to base one’s 

87 An analogous “biographical” dream is recorded on pp. 2S0-1, among the 
examples of dream symbolism. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


239 

diagnosis of infections diseases on the olfactory impressions re- 
ceived beside the sick-bed, although of course there have been 
clinicians to whom the sense of smell — atrophied in most people 
— has been of greater service than to others, and who really have 
been able to diagnose a case of abdominal typhus by their sense 
of smell. 

The progressive experience of psychoanalysis has enabled us 
to discover patients who have displayed in a surprising degree 
this immediate understanding of dream-symbolism. Many of 
these patients suffered from dementia praecox, so that for a 
time there was an inclination to suspect that all dreamers with 
such an understanding of symbols were suffering from that dis- 
order. But this did not prove to be the case; it is simply a ques- 
tion of a personal gift or idiosyncrasy without perceptible 
pathological significance. 

When one has familiarized oneself with the extensive employ- 
ment of symbolism for the representation of sexual material in 
dreams, one naturally asks oneself whether many of these sym- 
bols have not a permanently established meaning, like the signs 
in shorthand; and one even thinks of attempting to compile a 
new dream-book on the lines of the cipher method. In this con- 
nection it should be noted that symbolism does not appertain 
especially to dreams, but rather to the unconscious imagination, 
and particularly to that of the people, and it is to be found in a 
more developed condition in folklore, myths, legends, idiomatic 
phrases, proverbs, and the current witticisms of a people than 
in dreams. We should have, therefore, to go far beyond the 
province of dream-interpretation in order fully to investigate 
the meaning of symbolism, and to discuss the numerous prob- 
lems — for the most part still unsolved — which are associated 
with the concept of the symbol / 58 We shall here confine ourselves 
to say that representation by a symbol comes under the heading 
of the indirect representations, but that we are warned by all 

38 CL the works of Bleuler and his Zurich disciples, Maeder, Abraham, and 
others, and of the non-medical authors (Kleinpaul and others) to whom 
they refer. But the most pertinent things that have been said on the subject 
will be found in the work of O. Rank and H. Sachs, Die Bedeutung der 
Psychoanalyse fiir die Geisteswissenschaft, 1913, chap, i; also E. Jones, 
Die Theorie der Symbolik Intern . Zeitsckr. fiir Psychoanalyse, v. 1919. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


240 

sorts of signs against indiscriminately classing symbolic repre- 
sentation with the other modes of indirect representation before 
we have clearly conceived its distinguishing characteristics. In 
a number of cases the common quality shared by the symbol and 
the thing which it represents is obvious, in others it is concealed; 
in these latter cases the choice of the symbol appears to be enig- 
matic. And these are the very cases that must be able to eluci- 
date the ultimate meaning of the symbolic relation; they point 
to the fact that it is of a genetic nature. What is to-day sym- 
bolically connected was probably united, in primitive times, by 
conceptual and linguistic identity. 39 The symbolic relationship 
seems to be a residue and reminder of a former identity. It may 
also be noted that in many cases the symbolic identity extends 
beyond the linguistic identity, as had already been asserted by 
Schubert (1814). 40 

Dreams employ this symbolism to give a disguised represen- 
tation to their latent thoughts. Among the symbols thus em- 
ployed there are, of course, many which constantly, or all but 
constantly, mean the same thing. But we must bear in mind the 
curious plasticity of psychic material. Often enough a symbol in 
the dream-content may have to be interpreted not symbolically 
but in accordance with its proper meaning; at other times the 
dreamer, having to deal with special memory-material, may 
take the law into his own hands and employ anything whatever 
as a sexual symbol, though it is not generally so employed. 
Wherever he has the choice of several symbols for the represen- 
tation of a dream-content, he will decide in favour of that sym- 

89 This conception would seem to find an extraordinary confirmation in a 
theory advanced by Hans Sperber (Vber den Einfluss sexueller momente 
auf Entstehung und EntwUMung der Sprache , in Imago , i, 1912). Sperber 
believes that primitive words denoted sexual things exclusively, and subse- 
quently lost their sexual significance and were applied to other things and 
activities, which were compared with the sexual. 

40 For example, a ship sailing on the sea may appear in the urinary dreams 
of Hungarian dreamers, despite the fact that the term of "to ship,” for "to 
urinate,” is foreign to this language (Ferenczi) . In the dreams of the French 
and the other romance peoples "room” serves as a symbolic representation 
for "woman,” although these peoples have nothing analogous to the Ger- 
man Frauenzimmer . Many symbols are as old as language itself, while 
others are continually being coined (e.g. the aeroplane, the Zeppelin). 


THE DREAM-WORK 


241 

bol which is in addition objectively related to his other thought- 
material; that is to say, he will employ an individual motivation 
besides the typically valid one. 

Although since Schemer’s time the more recent investigations 
of dream-problems have definitely established the existence of 
dream-symbolism — even Havelock Ellis acknowledges that our 
dreams are indubitably full of symbols — it must yet be admitted 
that the existence of symbols in dreams has not only facilitated 
dream-interpretation, but has also made it more difficult. The 
technique of interpretation in accordance with the dreamer’s 
free associations more often than otherwise leaves us in the 
lurch as far as the symbolic elements of the dream-content are 
concerned. A return to the arbitrariness of dream-interpretation 
as it was practised in antiquity, and is seemingly revived by 
StekePs wild interpretations, is contrary to scientific method. 
Consequently, those elements in the dream-content which are to 
be symbolically regarded compel us to employ a combined tech- 
nique, which on the one hand is based on the dreamer’s associa- 
tions, while on the other hand the missing portions have to be 
supplied by the interpreter’s understanding of the symbols. 
Critical circumspection in the solution of the symbols must coin- 
cide with careful study of the symbols in especially transparent 
examples of dreams in order to silence the reproach of arbitrari- 
ness in dream-interpretation. The uncertainties which still ad- 
here to our function as dream-interpreters are due partly to our 
imperfect knowledge (which, however, can be progressively in- 
creased) and partly to certain peculiarities of the dream-sym- 
bols themselves. These often possess many and varied meanings, 
so that, as in Chinese script, only the context can furnish the 
correct meaning. This multiple significance of the symbol is 
allied to the dream’s faculty of admitting over-interpretations, 
of representing, in the same content, various wish-impulses and 
thought-formations, often of a widely divergent character. 

After these limitations and reservations I will proceed. The 
Emperor and the Empress (King and Queen ) 41 in most cases 

41 [In the U.SA. the father is represented in dreams as “the President,” and 
even more often as “the Governor” — a title which is frequently applied to 
the parent in everyday life. — Trans.] 



242 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

really represent the dreamer’s parents; the dreamer himself or 
herself is the prince or princess. But the high authority con- 
ceded to the Emperor is also conceded to great men, so that in 
some dreams, for example, Goethe appears as a father-symbol 
(Hitschmann). — All elongated objects, jticks, tree-trunks, um- 
brellas (on account of the opening, which might be likened to an 
erection), all sharp and elongated weapons, knives, daggers, and 
pikes, represent the male member. A frequent, but not very in- 
telligible symbol for the same is a nail-file (a reference to rubbing 
and scraping?) . — Small boxes, chests, cupboards, and ovens cor- 
respond to the female organ; also cavities, ships, and all kinds 
of vessels. — A room in a dream generally represents a woman; 
the description of its various entrances and exits is scarcely 
calculated to make us doubt this interpretation . 42 The interest 
as to whether the room is “open” or “locked” will be readily 
understood in this connection. (Cf. Dora’s dream in Fragment 
of an Analysis of Hysteria .) There is no need to be explicit as to 
the sort of key that will unlock the room; the symbolism of 
“lock and key” has been gracefully if broadly employed by 
Uhland in his song of the Graf Ebersiein . — The dream of walk- 
ing through a suite of rooms signifies a brothel or a harem. But, 
as H. Sachs has shown by an admirable example, it is also em- 
ployed to represent marriage (contrast). An interesting relation 
to the sexual investigations of childhood emerges when the 
dreamer dreams of two rooms which were previously one, or 
finds that a familiar room in a house of which he dreams has 
been divided into two, or the reverse. In childhood the female 
genitals and anus (the “behind” 43 ) are conceived of as a single 

d2 “A patient living in a boarding-house dreams that he meets one of the 
servants, and asks her what her number is; to his surprise she answers: 14. 
He has in fact entered into relations with the girl in question, and has often 
had her in his bedroom. She feared, as may be imagined, that the landlady 
suspected her, and had proposed, on the day before the dream, that they 
should meet in one of the unoccupied rooms. In reality this room had the 
number 14, while in the dream the woman bore this number. A dearer 
proof of the identification of woman and room could hardly be imagined.” 
(Ernest Jones, Intern . Zeitschr . /. Psychoanalyse , ii, 1914). (Cf. Artemi- 
dorus, The Symbolism 0} Dreams [German version by F. S. Krauss, Vienna, 
1881, p. no]: “Thus, for example, the bedroom signifies the wife, sup- 
posing one to be in the house.”) 



THE DREAM-WORK 


243 

opening according to the infantile cloaca theory, and only later 
is it discovered that this region of the body contains two separate 
cavities and openings. Steep inclines, ladders, and stairs, and 
going up or down them, are symbolic representations of the sex- 
ual act . 44 Smooth walls over which one climbs, facades of houses, 
across which one lets oneself down — often with a sense of great 
anxiety — correspond to erect human bodies, and probably re- 
peat in our dreams childish memories of climbing up parents or 
nurses. “Smooth” walls are men; in anxiety dreams one often 
holds firmly to “projections” on houses. Tables, whether bare or 
covered, and boards, are women, perhaps by virtue of contrast, 
since they have no protruding contours. “Wood,” generally 
speaking, seems, in accordance with its linguistic relations, to 
represent feminine matter ( Materie ) . The name of the island 
Madeira means “wood” in Portuguese. Since “bed and board” 
( mensa et thorns) constitute marriage, in dreams the latter is 
often substituted for the former, and as far as practicable the 
sexual representation-complex is transposed to the eating-com- 
plex. — Of articles of dress, a woman’s hat may very often be 
interpreted with certainty as the male genitals. In the dreams 
of men one often finds the necktie as a symbol for the penis; this 

43 Cf. “the cloaca theory” in Three Contributions to the Theory of 
Sex. 

44 1 may here repeat what I have said in another place ( Die Zukunftigen 
Chancen der psychoanalytischen Therapie, Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, 
i, No. 1 and 2, 1910, and Ges. Schriften, Bd. vi) : “Some time ago I learned 
that a psychologist who is unfamiliar with our work remarked to one of 
my friends that we were surely overestimating the secret sexual significance 
of dreams. He stated that his most frequent dream was that of climbing a 
flight of stairs, and that there was surely nothing sexual behind this. Our 
attention having been called to this objection, we directed our investiga- 
tions to the occurrence in dreams of flights of stairs, ladders, and steps, 
and we soon ascertained that stairs (or anything analogous to them) repre- 
sent a definite symbol of coitus. The basis for this comparison is not difficult 
to find; with rhythmical intervals and increasing breathlessness one reaches 
a height, and may then come down again in a few rapid jumps. Thus the 
rhythm of coitus is reproduced in climbing stairs. Let us not forget to con- 
sider the colloquial usage. This tells us that ‘mounting’ is without further 
addition, used as a substitutive designation for the sexual act. In French, 
the step of a staircase is called la marche ; un vieux marcheur corresponds 
exactly to the German, ein alter Steiger ” 



THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


244 

is not only because neckties hang down in front of the body, and 
are characteristic of men, but also because one can select them 
at pleasure, a freedom which nature prohibits as regards the 
original of the symbol. Persons who make use of this symbol in 
dreams are very extravagant in the matter of ties, and possess 
whole collections of them . 45 All complicated machines and ap- 
pliances are very probably the genitals — as a rule the male 
genitals — in the description of which the symbolism of dreams 
is as indefatigable as human wit. It is quite unmistakable that 
all weapons and tools are used as symbols for the male organ: 
e.g. ploughshare, hammer, gun, revolver, dagger, sword, etc. 
Again, many of the landscapes seen in dreams, especially those 
that contain bridges or wooded mountains, may be readily 
recognized as descriptions of the genitals. Marcinowski collected 
a series of examples in which the dreamer explained his dream 
by means of drawings, in order to represent the landscapes and 
places appearing in it. These drawings clearly showed the dis- 
tinction between the manifest and the latent meaning of the 
dream. Whereas, naively regarded, they seemed to represent 
plans, maps, and so forth, closer investigation showed that they 
were representations of the human body, of the genitals, etc., 
and only after conceiving them thus could the dream be under- 
stood . 46 Finally, where one finds incomprehensible neologisms 
one may suspect combinations of components having a sexual 
significance. — Children, too, often signify the genjtals^-since 
.men and women are in the ..habit,. of- fondly. referring to their 
genital organs as “little man,” “little woman,” “little thing ” 
The “little brother” was correctly recognized by Stekel as the 
penis. To play with or to beat a little child is often the dream’s 
representation of masturbation. The dream-work represents 
castration by baldness, hair-cutting, the loss of teeth, and be- 

45 Cf. in the Zentrdblatt fur Psychoanalyse, ii, 675, the drawing of a nine- 
teen-year-old manic patient: a man with a snake as a neck-tie, which is 
turning towards a girl. Also the story Der Schamhaftige {Anthropophyteia, 
vi, 334) • A woman entered a bathroom, and there came face to face with a 
man who hardly had time to put on his shirt. He was greatly embarrassed, 
but at once covered his throat with the front of his shirt, and said: “Please 
excuse me, I have no necktie ” 

40 Cf. Pfister’s works on cryptography and picture-puzzles. 


THE BREAM-WORK 


245 

heading. As an insurance against castration, the dream uses one 
of the common symbols of a penis in double or multiple form; 
and the appearance in a dream of a lizard — an animal whose 
tail, if pulled off, is regenerated by a new growth — has the same 
meaning. Most of those animals which are utilized as genital 
symbols in mythology and folklore play this part also in dreams: 
the fish, the snail, the cat, the mouse (on account of the hairi- 
ness of the genitals), but above all the snake, which is the most 
important symbol of the male member. Small animals and ver- 
min are substitutes for little children, e.g. undesired sisters or 
brothers. To be infected with vermin is often the equivalent for 
pregnancy. — As a very recent symbol of the male organ I may 
mention the airship, whose employment is justified by its rela- 
tion to flying, and also, occasionally, by its form. — Stekel has 
given a number of other symbols, not yet sufficiently verified, 
which he has illustrated by examples. The works of this author, 
and especially his book: Die Sprache des Traumes, contain the 
richest collection of interpretations of symbols, some of which 
were ingeniously guessed and were proved to be correct upon 
investigation, as, for example, in the section on the symbolism 
of death. The author’s lack of critical reflection, and his tend- 
ency to generalize at all costs, make his interpretations doubt- 
ful or inapplicable, so that in making use of his works caution 
is urgently advised. I shall therefore restrict myself to men- 
tioning a few examples. 

Right and left, according to Stekel, are to be understood in 
dreams in an ethical sense. “The right-hand path always signifies 
the way to righteousness, the left-hand path the path to crime. 
Thus the left may signify homosexuality, incest, and perversion, 
while the right signifies marriage, relations with a prostitute, 
etc. The meaning is always determined by the individual moral 
standpoint of the dreamer” (loc. cit., p. 466). Relatives in 
dreams generally stand for the genitals (p. 373 ff.). Here I can 
confirm this meaning only for the son, the daughter, and the 
younger sister — that is, wherever “little thing” could be em- 
ployed. On the other hand, verified examples allow us to recog- 
nize sisters as symbols of the breasts, and brothers as symbols 
of the larger hemispheres. To be unable to overtake a carriage 



246 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

is interpreted by Stekel as regret at being unable to catch up 
with a difference in age (p. 479). The luggage of a traveller is 
the burden of sin by whic]x.Dne is oppressed {ibid.). But a 
. travellers luggage often proves to be an unmistakable symbol 
f of one’s own genitals. To numbers, which frequently occur in 
dreams, Stekel has assignedaffixed symbolic meaning, but these 
interpretations seem neither sufficiently verified nor of universal 
validity, although in individual cases they can usually be recog- 
nized as plausible. We have, at all events, abundant confirma- 
tion that the figure three is a symbol of the male genitals. One 
of StekePs generalizations refers to the double meaning of the 
genital symbols. “Where is there a symbol,’ 5 he asks, “which 
(if in any way permitted by the imagination) may not be used 
simultaneously in the masculine and the feminine sense?” To 
be sure, the clause in parenthesis retracts much of the absolute 
character of this assertion, for this double meaning is not always 
permitted by the imagination. Still, I think it is not superfluous 
to state that in my experience this general statement of StekePs 
requires elaboration. Besides those symbols which are just as 
frequently employed for the male as for the female genitals, 
there are others which preponderantly, or almost exclusively, 
designate one of the sexes, and there are yet others which, so far 
as we know, have only the male or only the female signification. 
To use long, stiff objects and weapons as symbols of the female 
genitals, or hollow objects (chests, boxes, etc.) as symbols of the 
male genitals, is certainly not permitted by the imagination. 

It is true that the tendency of dreams, and of the unconscious 
phantasy, to employ the sexual symbols bisexually, reveals an 
archaic trait, for in childhood the difference in the genitals is 
unknown, and the same genitals are attributed to both sexes. 
One may also be misled as regards the significance of a bisexual 
symbol if one forgets the fact that in some dreams a general re- 
versal of sexes takes takes place, so that the male organ is repre- 
sented by the female, and vice versa . Such dreams express, for 
example, the wish of a woman to be a man. 

The genitals may even be represented in dreams by other 
parts of the body: the male member by the hand or the foot, the 
female genital orifice by the mouth, the ear, or even the eye. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


247 

The secretions of the human body — mucus, tears, urine, semen, 
etc. — may be used in dreams interchangeably. This statement 
of Stekel’s, correct in the main, has suffered a justifiable critical 
restriction as the result of certain comments of R. Reitier’s 
{Internal. Zeitschr . fur Psych., i, 1913). The gist of the matter 
is the replacement of an important secretion, such as the semen, 
by an indifferent one. 

These very incomplete indications may suffice to stimulate 
others to make a more painstaking collection. 47 1 have attempted 
a much more detailed account of dream-symbolism in my Intro- 
ductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (trans. by Joan Riviere. 
Allen & Unwin, London). 

I shall now append a few instances of the use of such symbols, 
which will show how impossible it is to arrive at the interpreta- 
tion of a dream if one excludes dream-symbolism, but also how 
in many cases it is imperatively forced upon one. At the same 
time, I must expressly warn the investigator against overesti- 
mating the importance of symbols in the interpretation of 
dreams, restricting the work of dream-translation to the trans- 
lation of symbols, and neglecting the technique of utilizing the 
associations of the dreamer. The two techniques of dream-inter- 
pretation must supplement one another; practically, however, 
as well as theoretically, precedence is retained by the latter 
process, which assigns the final significance to the utterances of 
the dreamer, while the symbol-translations which we undertake 
play an auxiliary part. 

1. The hat as the symbol of a man (of the male genitals) : 48 
(A fragment from the dream of a young woman who suffered 
from agoraphobia as the result of her fear of temptation.) 

"7 am walking in the street in summer; I am wearing a straw 
hat of peculiar shape , the middle piece of which is bent upwards , 
while the side pieces hang downwards { here the description hesi - 

47 In spite of aU the differences between Schemer’s conception of dream- 
symbolism and the one developed here, I must still insist that Schemer 
should be recognized as the true discoverer of symbolism in dreams, and 
that the experience of psychoanalysis has brought his book (published in 
1861) into posthumous repute. 

48 From Nachtrage zur Traumdeutung in Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse , i, 
Nos. 5 and 6, 1911. 



24 $ the interpretation of dreams 

totes), and in such a fashion that one hangs lower than the 
other . I am cheerful and in a confident mood, and as I pass a 
number of young officers I think to myself: You can’t do any- 
thing to me” 

As she could produce no associations to the hat, I said to her: 
“The hat is really a male genital organ, with its raised middle 
piece and the two downward-hanging side pieces.” It is perhaps 
peculiar that her hat should be supposed to be a man, but alter 
all one says: Unter die Eaube kommen (to get under the cap) 
when we mean: to get married. I intentionally refrained from 
interpreting the details concerning the unequal dependence of 
the two side pieces, although the determination of just such de- 
tails must point the way to the interpretation. I went on to say 
that if, therefore, she had a husband with such splendid genitals 
she would not have to fear the officers; that is, she would have 
nothing to wish from them, for it was essentially her temptation- 
phantasies which prevented her from going about unprotected 
and unaccompanied. This last explanation of her anxiety I had 
already been able to give her repeatedly on the basis of other 
material. 

It is quite remarkable how the dreamer behaved after this 
interpretation. She withdrew her description of the hat, and 
would not admit that she had said that the two side pieces were 
hanging down. I was, however, too sure of what I had heard to 
allow myself to be misled, and so I insisted that she did say it. 
She was quiet for a while, and then found the courage to ask 
why it was that one of her husband’s testicles was lower than 
the other, and whether it was the same with all men. With this 
the peculiar detail of the hat was explained, and the whole in- 
terpretation was accepted by her. 

The hat symbol was familiar to me long before the patient 
related this dream. From other but less transparent cases I be- 
lieved that I might assume the hat could also stand for the 
female genitals . 49 

49 Cf. Kirchgraber for a similar example ( Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse , 
iii, 1912, p. 95) . Stekel reported a dream in which the hat with an obliquely- 
standing feather in the middle symbolized the (impotent) man. 



THE DREAM- W 0RK 249 

2. The “little one” as the genital organ. Being run over as a 
symbol of sexual intercourse. 

(Another dream of the same agoraphobic patient.) 

“Eer mother sends away her little daughter so that she has 
to go alone. She then drives with her mother to the railway sta- 
tion , and sees her little one walking right along the track , so that 
she is bound to be run over . She hears the bones crack . (At this 
she experiences a feeling of discomfort but no real horror .) She 
then looks out through the carriage window } to see whether the 
parts cannot be seen behind . Then she reproaches her mother 
for allowing the little one to go out alone” 

Analysis. — It is not an easy matter to give here a complete 
interpretation of the dream. It forms part of a cycle of dreams, 
and can be fully understood only in connection with the rest. 
For it is not easy to obtain the material necessary to demon- 
strate the symbolism in a sufficiently isolated condition. The 
patient at first finds that the railway journey is to be interpreted 
historically as an allusion to a departure from a sanatorium for 
nervous diseases, with whose director she was of course in love. 
Her mother fetched her away, and before her departure the 
physician came the the railway station and gave her a bunch of 
flowers; she felt uncomfortable because her mother witnessed 
this attention. Here the mother, therefore, appears as the dis- 
turber of her tender feelings, a role actually played by this strict 
woman during her daughter’s girlhood. — The next association 
referred to the sentence: “She then looks to see whether the 
parts cannot be seen behind.” In the dream-fagade one would 
naturally be compelled to think of the pieces of the little daugh- 
ter who had been run over and crushed. The association, how- 
ever, turns in quite a different direction. She recalls that she 
once saw her father in the bath-room, naked, from behind; she 
then begins to talk about sex differences, and remarks that in 
the man the genitals can be seen from behind, but in the woman 
they cannot. In this connection she now herself offers the inter- 
pretation that “the little one” is the genital organ, and her little 
one (she has a four-year-old daughter) her own organ. She re- 
proaches her mother for wanting her to live as though she had 



250 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

no genitals, and recognizes this reproach in the introductory 
sentence of the dream: the mother sends her little one away, so 
that she has to go alone. In her phantasy, going alone through 
the streets means having no man, no sexual relations (coire = 
to go together), and this she does not like. According to all her 
statements, she really suffered as a girl through her mother’s 
jealousy, because her father showed a preference for her. 

The deeper interpretation of this dream depends upon another 
dream of the same night, in which the dreamer identifies herself 
with her brother. She was a “tomboy,” and was always being 
told that she should have been born a boy. This identification 
with the brother shows with especial clearness that “the little 
one” signifies the genital organ. The mother threatened him 
(her) with castration, which could only be understood as a 
punishment for playing with the genital parts, and the identifi- 
cation, therefore, shows that she herself had masturbated as a 
child, though she had retained only a memory of her brother’s 
having done so. An early knowledge of the male genitals, which 
she lost later, must, according to the assertions of this second 
dream, have been acquired at this time. Moreover, the second 
dream points to the infantile sexual theory that girls originate 
from boys as a result of castration. After I had told her of this 
childish belief, she at once confirmed it by an anecdote in which 
the boy asks the girl: “Was it cut off?” to which the girl replies: 
“No, it’s always been like that.” 

Consequently the sending away of “the little one,” of the 
genital organ, in the first dream refers also to the threatened 
castration. Finally, she blames her mother for not having borne 
her as a boy. 

That “being run over” symbolizes sexual intercourse would 
not be evident from this dream if we had not learned it from 
many other sources. 

3. Representation of the genitals by buildings, stairs, and 
shafts. 

(Dream of a young man inhibited by a father complex.) 

“He is taking a walk with his father in a place which is cer- 
tainly the Prater , for one can see the Rotunda , in front of which 
there is a small vestibule to which there is attached a captive 



THE DREAM-WORK. 


251 

balloon; the balloon , however, seems rather limp. His father 
asks him what this is all for; he is surprised at it, but he ex- 
plains it to his father . They come into a courtyard in which lies 
a large sheet of tin . His father wants to pull off a big piece of 
this, but first looks round to see if anyone is watching. He tells 
his father that all he needs to do- is to speak to the overseer , and 
then he can take as much as he wants to without any more ado . 
From this courtyard a flight of stairs leads down into a shaft , 
the walls of which are softly upholstered, rather like a leather 
arm-chair . At the end of this shaft there is a long platform , and 
then a new shaft begins . . 

Analysis. — -This dreamer belonged to a type of patient which 
is not at all promising from a therapeutic point of view; up to a 
certain point in the analysis such patients offer no resistance 
whatever, but from that point onwards they prove to be almost 
inaccessible. This dream he analysed almost independently, 
‘‘The Rotunda,” he said, “is my genitals, the captive balloon in 
front is my penis, about whose fiaccidity I have been worried.” 
We must, however, interpret it in greater detail: the Rotunda is 
the buttocks, constantly associated by the child with the geni- 
tals; the smaller structure in front is the scrotum. In the dream 
his father asks him what this is all for — that is, he asks him 
about the purpose and arrangement of the genitals. It is quite 
evident that this state of affairs should be reversed, and that he 
ought to be the questioner. As such questioning on the part of 
the father never occurred in reality, we must conceive the 
dream-thought as a wish, or perhaps take it conditionally, as 
follows. “If I had asked my father for sexual enlightenment . . 
The continuation of this thought we shall presently find in 
another place. 

The courtyard in which the sheet of tin is spread out is not to 
be conceived symbolically in the first instance, but originates 
from his father’s place of business. For reasons of discretion I 
have inserted the tin for another material in which the father 
deals without, however, changing anything in the verbal expres- 
sion of the dream. The dreamer had entered his father’s busi- 
ness, and had taken a terrible dislike to the somewhat question- 
able practices upon which its profit mainly depended. Hence the 



252 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

continuation of the above dream-thought (“if I had asked him”) 
would be: “He would have deceived me just as he does his cus- 
tomers ” For the “pulling off,” which serves to represent com- 
mercial dishonesty, the dreamer himself gives a second explana- 
tion, namely, masturbation. This is not only quite familiar to us 
(see above, p. 237), but agrees very well with the fact that the 
secrecy of masturbation is expressed by its opposite (one can do 
it quite openly). Thus, it agrees entirely with our expectations 
that the auto-erotic activity should be attributed to the father, 
just as was the questioning in the first scene of the dream. The 
shaft he at once interprets as the vagina, by referring to the soft 
upholstering of the walls. That the action of coition in the vagina 
is described as a going down instead of in the usual way as a go- 
ing up agrees with what I have found in other instances. 50 

The details — that at the end of the first shaft there is a long 
platform, and then a new shaft — he himself explains biographi- 
cally. He had for some time had sexual intercourse with women, 
but had given it up on account of inhibitions, and now hopes to 
be able to begin it again with the aid of the treatment. The 
dream, however, becomes indistinct towards the end, and to the 
experienced interpreter it becomes evident that in the second 
scene of the dream the influence of another subject has already 
begun to assert itself ; which is indicated by his father’s business, 
his dishonest practices, and the vagina represented by the first 
shaft, so that one may assume a reference to his mother. 

4. The Male Organ symbolized by Persons and the Female 
by a Landscape. 

(Dream of a woman of the lower class, whose husband is a 
policeman, reported by B. Dattner.) 

. . Then someone broke into the house and she anxiously 
called for a policeman . But he went peacefully with two tramps 
into a church , 51 to which a great many steps led up;* 2 behind the 
church there was a mountain** on top of which there was a dense 

50 Cf . comment in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse , 1 ; and see above, p. 
237, note 34. 

51 Or chapel = vagina, 

* 2 Symbol of coitus. 

153 Mons Veneris. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


2 53 

forest. 54 * The policeman was provided with a helmet , a gorget , 
and a cloak . 55 The two vagrants, who went dong with the police- 
man quite peaceably , had sack-like aprons tied round their 
loins ? 5 A road led from the church to the mountains . This road 
was overgrown on each side with grass and brushwood , which 
became thicker and thicker as it reached the top of the moun- 
tain, where it spread out into quite a forest ” 

5. Castration Dreams of children. 

(а) “A boy aged three years and five months, for whom his 
father’s return from military service is clearly inconvenient, 
wakes one morning in a disturbed and excited state, and con- 
stantly repeats the question: Why did Daddy carry his head on 
a plate? Last night Daddy carried his head on a plate . 79 

(б) “A student who is now suffering from a severe obsessional 
neurosis remembers that in his sixth year he repeatedly had the 
following dream: He goes to the barber to have his hair cut. Then 
a large woman with severe features comes up to him and cuts off 
his head. He recognizes the woman as his mother ” 

6 . A modified staircase dream. 

To one of my patients, a sexual abstainer, who was very ill, 
whose phantasy was fixated upon his mother, and who repeatedly 
dreamed of climbing stairs while accompanied by his mother, I 
once remarked that moderate masturbation would probably 
have been less harmful to him than his enforced abstinence. The 
influence of this remark provoked the following dream: 

His piano teacher reproaches him for neglecting his piano- 
playing, and for not practicing the fctudes of Moscheles and 
dementi’s Gradus ad Pamassum. With reference to this he re- 
marked that the Gradus, too, is a stairway, and that the piano 
itself is a stairway, as it has a scale. 

It may be said that there is no class of ideas which cannot be 
enlisted in the representation of sexual facts and wishes. 

7. The Sensation of Reality and the Representation of Repeti- 
tion. 

54 Crines pubis. 

c5 Demons in cloaks and hoods are, according to the explanation of a spe- 
cialist, of a phallic character. 

56 The two halves of the scrotum. 



254 the interpretation oe dreams 

A man, now thirty-five, relates a clearly remembered dream 
which he claims to have had when he was four years of age: The 
notary with whom his father’s will was deposited — he had lost 
his father at the age of three — brought two large Emperor-pears, 
of which he was given one to eat . The other lay on the window- 
sill of the living-room . He woke with the conviction of the reality 
of what he had dreamt, and obstinately asked his mother to give 
him the second pear; it was, he said, still lying on the window- 
sill. His mother laughed at this. 

Analysis. — The notary was a jovial old gentleman who, as he 
seems to remember, really sometimes brought pears with him. 
The window-sill was as he saw it in the dream. Nothing else 
occurs to him in this connection, except, perhaps, that his mother 
has recently told him a dream. She has two birds sitting on her 
head; she wonders when they will fly away, but they do not fly 
away, and one of them flies to her mouth and sucks at it. 

The dreamer’s inability to furnish associations justifies the 
attempt to interpret it by the substitution of symbols. The two 
pears — pommes ou poires — are the breasts of the mother who 
nursed him; the window-sill is the projection of the bosom, 
analogous to the balconies in the dream of houses. His sensation 
of reality after waking is justified, for his mother had actually 
suckled him for much longer than the customary term, and her 
breast was still available. The dream is to be translated: 
“Mother, give (show) me the breast again at which I once used 
to drink.” The “once” is represented by the eating of the one 
pear, the “again” by the desire for the other. The temporal 
repetition of an act is habitually represented in dreams by the 
numerical multiplication of an object . 

It is naturally a very striking phenomenon that symbolism 
should already play a part in the dream of a child of four, but 
this is the rule rather than the exception. One may say that the 
dreamer has command of symbolism from the very first. 

The early age at which people make use of symbolic rep- 
resentation, even apart from the dream-life, may be shown by 
the following uninfluenced memory of a lady who is now twenty- 
seven: She is in her fourth year . The nursemaid is driving her , 
with her brother, eleven months younger t and a cousin, who is 



THE DREAM-WORK 


2 55 

between the two in age , to the lavatory , so that they can do their 
little business there before going for their walk . As the oldest , 
she sits on the seat and the other two on chambers . She asks her 
( female ) cousin: Have you a purse , too? Walter has a little 
sausage , I have a purse . The cousin answers: Yes , I have a purse, 
too . The nursemaid listens, laughing, and relates the conversa- 
tion to the mother, whose reaction is a sharp reprimand . 

Here a dream may be inserted whose excellent symbolism 
permitted of interpretation with little assistance from the 
dreamer: 

8. The Question of Symbolism in the Dreams of Normal 
Persons. 57 

An objection frequently raised by the opponents of psycho- 
analysis — and recently also by Havelock Ellis 58 — is that, al- 
though dream-symbolism may perhaps be a product of the neu- 
rotic psyche, it has no validity whatever in the case of normal 
persons. But while psychoanalysis recognizes no essential dis- 
tinctions, but only quantitative differences, between the psychic 
life of the normal person and that of the neurotic, the analysis 
of those dreams in which, in sound and sick persons alike, the 
repressed complexes display the same activity, reveals the abso- 
lute identity of the mechanisms as well as of the symbolism. 
Indeed, the natural dreams of healthy persons often contain a 
much simpler, more transparent, and more characteristic sym- 
bolism than those of neurotics, which, owing to the greater strict- 
ness of the censorship and the more extensive dream-distortion 
resulting therefrom, are frequently troubled and obscured, and 
are therefore more difficult to translate. The following dream 
serves to illustrate this fact. This dream comes from a non- 
neurotic girl of a rather prudish and reserved type. In the course 
of conversation I found that she was engaged to be married, but 
that there were hindrances in the way of the marriage which 
threatened to postpone it. She related spontaneously the follow- 
ing dream: 

I arrange the centre of a table with flowers for a birthday . On 
being questioned she states that in the dream she seemed to be 

57 Alfred Robitsek in the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, ii, 1911, p. 3 40. 

58 The World of Dreams, London, 19x1, p. 168. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


256 

at home (she has no home at the time) and experienced a feeling 
of happiness. 

The “popular” symbolism enables me to translate the dream 
for myself. It is the expression of her wish to be married: the 
table, with the flowers in the centre, is symbolic of herself and 
her genitals. She represents her future wishes as fulfilled, inas- 
much as she is already occupied with thoughts of the birth of a 
child; so the wedding has taken place long ago. 

I call her attention to the fact that “the centre of a table” is 
an unusual expression, which she admits; but here, of course, I 
cannot question her more directly. I carefully refrain from sug- 
gesting to her the meaning of the symbols, and ask her only for 
the thoughts which occur to her mind in connection with the 
individual parts of the dream. In the course of the analysis her 
reserve gave way to a distinct interest in the interpretation, and 
a frankness which was made possible by the serious tone of the 
conversation. — To my question as to what kind of flowers they 
had been, her first answer is “expensive flowers ; one has to pay 
for them then she adds that they were lilies-of-the-valley, vio- 
lets r, and pinks or carnations . I took the word lily in this dream in 
its popular sense, as a symbol of chastity; she confirmed this, as 
purity occurred to her in association with lily. Valley is a com- 
mon feminine dream-symbol. The chance juxtaposition of the 
two symbols in the name of the flower is made into a piece of 
dream-symbolism, and serves to emphasize the preciousness of 
her virginity — expensive flowers ; one has to pay for them — and 
expresses the expectation that her husband will know how to 
appreciate its value. The comment, expensive flowers, etc., has, 
as will be shown, a different meaning in every one of the three 
different flower-symbols. 

I thought of what seemed to me a venturesome explanation of 
the hidden meaning of the apparently quite asexual word violets 
by an unconscious relation to the French viol . But to my surprise 
the dreamer's association was the English word violate . The 
accidental phonetic similarity of the two words violet and vio- 
late is utilized by the dream to express in “the language of flow- 
ers” the idea of the violence of defloration (another word which 
makes use of flower-symbolism), and perhaps also to give ex- 


THE DREAM-WORK 


257 

pression to a masochistic tendency on the part of the girl. — An 
excellent example of the word bridges across which run the 
paths to the unconscious. “One has to pay for them ” here means 
life, with which she has to pay for becoming a wife and a mother. 

In association with pinks, which she then calls carnations, I 
think of carnal. But her association is colour, to which she adds 
that carnations are the flowers which her fiance gives her fre- 
quently and in large quantities. At the end of the conversation 
she suddenly admits, spontaneously, that she has not told me 
the truth; the word that occurred to her was not colour, but in- 
carnation, the very word I expected. Moreover, even the word 
“colour” is not a remote association; it was determined by the 
meaning of carnation (i.e. flesh-colour ) — that is, by the com- 
plex. This lack of honesty shows that the resistance here is at its 
greatest because the symbolism is here most transparent, and the 
struggle between libido and repression is most intense in connec- 
tion with this phallic theme. The remark that these flowers were 
often given her by her fiance is, together with the double mean- 
ing of carnation, a still further indication of their phallic signifi- 
cance in the dream. The occasion of the present of flowers during 
the day is employed to express the thought of a sexual present 
and a return present. She gives her virginity and expects in re- 
turn for it a rich love-life. But the words: “ expensive flowers ; 
one has to pay for them” may have a real, financial meaning. — 
The flower-symbolism in the dream thus comprises the virginal 
female, the male symbol, and the reference to violent defloration. 
It is to be noted that sexual flower-symbolism, which, of course, 
is very widespread, symbolizes the human sexual organs by 
flowers, the sexual organs of plants; indeed, presents of flowers 
between lovers may perhaps have this unconscious significance. 

The birthday for which she is making preparations in the 
dream probably signifies the birth of a child. She identifies her- 
self with the bridegroom, and represents him preparing her for 
a birth (having coitus with her). It is as though the latent 
thoughts were to say: “If I were he, I would not wait, but I 
would deflower the bride without asking her; I would use vio- 
lence.” Indeed, the word violate points to this. Thus even the 
sadistic libidinal components find expression. 



THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


258 

In a deeper stratum of the dream the sentence 1 arrange , etc., 
probably has an auto-erotic, that is, an infantile significance. 

She also has a knowledge — possible only in the dream — of her 
physical need; she sees herself fiat like a table, so that she em- 
phasizes all the more her virginity, the costliness of the centre 
(another time she calls it a centre-piece of flowers). Even the 
horizontal element of the table may contribute something to the 
symbol. — The concentration of the dream is worthy of remark; 
nothing is superfluous, every word is a symbol. 

Later on she brings me a supplement to this dream: “I dec- 
orate the flowers with green crinkled paper” She adds that it 
was fancy paper of the sort which is used to disguise ordinary 
flower-pots. She says also: “To hide untidy things, whatever 
was to be seen which was not pretty to the eye; there is a gap, 
a little space in the flowers. The paper looks like velvet or moss.” 
With decorate she associates decorum , as I expected. The green 
colour is very prominent, and with this she associates hope , yet 
another reference to pregnancy. — In this part of the dream the 
identification with the man is not the dominant feature, but 
thoughts of shame and frankness express themselves. She makes 
herself beautiful for him; she admits physical defects, of which 
she is ashamed and which she wishes to correct. The associations 
velvet and moss distinctly point to crines pubis. 

The dream is an expression of thoughts hardly known to the 
waking state of the girl; thoughts which deal with the love of 
the senses and its organs; she is “prepared for a birth-day,” i.e. 
she has coitus; the fear of defloration and perhaps the pleas- 
urably toned pain find expression; she admits her physical de- 
fects and over-compensates them by means of an over-estimation 
of the value of her virginity. Her shame excuses the emerging 
sensuality by the fact that the aim of it all is the child. Even 
material considerations, which are foreign to the lover, find ex- 
pression here. The affect of the simple dream — the feeling of 
bliss — shows that here strong emotional complexes have found 
satisfaction. 

I close with the 

9 . Dream of a Chemist 



THE DREAM-WORK 259 

(A young man who has been trying to give up his habit of 
masturbation by substituting intercourse with a woman.) 

Preliminary statement: On the day before the dream he had 
been instructing a student as to Grignard’s reaction, in which 
magnesium is dissolved in absolutely pure ether under the cat- 
alytic influence of iodine. Two days earlier there had been an 
explosion in the course of the same reaction, in which someone 
had burned his hand. 

Dream I .He is going to make phenylmagnesiumbromide ; he 
sees the apparatus with particular distinctness, but he has sub- 
stituted himself for the magnesium. He is now in a curious, wav- 
ering attitude . He keeps on repeating to himself: “This is the 
right thing , it is working, my feet are beginning to dissolve , and 
my knees are getting soft. 97 Then he reaches down and feels for 
his feet, and meanwhile {he does not know how) he takes his legs 
out of the carboy , and then again he says to himself: “That can*t 
be... Yes, it has been done correctly 79 Then he partially wakes, 
and repeats the dream to himself, because he wants to tell it to 
me. He is positively afraid of the analysis of the dream . He is 
much excited during this state of semi-sleep , and repeats con- 
tinually: “Phenyl, phenyl 97 

II. He is in . . . with his whole family . He is supposed to be at 
the Schottentor at half-past eleven in order to keep an appoint- 
ment with the lady in question, but he does not wake until half- 
past eleven . He says to himself: “It is too late now; when you 
get there it will be half-past twelve 77 The next moment he sees 
the whole family gathered about the table — his mother and the 
parlourmaid with the soup-tureen with peculiar distinctness. 
Then he says to himself: “Well, if we are sitting down to eat 
already, 1 certainly can 7 t get away. 77 

Analysis . — He feels sure that even the first dream contains a 
reference to the lady whom he is to meet at the place of ren- 
dezvous (the dream was dreamed during the night before the 
expected meeting). The student whom he was instructing is a 
particularly unpleasant fellow; the chemist had said to him: 
“That isn’t right, because the magnesium was still unaffected,” 
and the student had answered, as though he were quite uncon- 



26 O THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

cemed: “Nor it is.” He himself must be this student; he is as 
indifferent to his analysis as the student is to his synthesis; the he 
in the dream, however, who performs the operation, is myself. 
How unpleasant he must seem to me with his indifference to the 
result! 

Again, he is the material with which the analysis (synthesis) 
is made. For the question is the success of the treatment. The 
legs in the dream recall an impression of the previous evening. He 
met a lady at a dancing class of whom he wished to make a 
conquest; he pressed her to him so closely that she once cried 
out. As he ceased to press her legs he felt her firm, responding 
pressure against his lower thighs as far as just above the knees, 
the spot mentioned in the dream. In this situation, then, the 
woman is the magnesium in the retort, which is at last working. 
He is feminine towards me, as he is virile towards the woman. 
If he succeeds with the woman, the treatment will also succeed. 
Feeling himself and becoming aware of his knees refers to 
masturbation, and corresponds to his fatigue of the previous 
day . . . The rendezvous had actually been made for half-past 
eleven. His wish to oversleep himself and to keep to his sexual 
object at home (that is, masturbation) corresponds to his re- 
sistance. 

He says, in respect to the repetition of the name phenyl, that 
all these radicals ending in yl have always been pleasing to him; 
they are very convenient to use: benzyl, acetyl, etc. That, how- 
ever, explained nothing. But when I proposed the root 
SchlemihP 9 he laughed heartily, and told me that during the 
summer he had read a book by Prevost which contained a chap- 
ter : Les exclus de V amour, and in this there was some mention of 
Schlemilies; and in reading of these outcasts he said to himself: 
“That is my case.” He would have played the Schlemihl if he 
had missed the appointment. 

It seems that the sexual symbolism of dreams has already been 
directly confirmed by experiment. In 1912 Dr. K. Schrotter, at 
the instance of H. Swoboda, produced dreams in deeply hyp- 
notized persons by suggestions which determined a large part of 

89 [This Hebrew word is well known in German-speaking countries, even 
among Gentiles, and signifies an unlucky, awkward person.— Trans.] 


THE DREAM-WORK. 


26l 

the dream-content. If the suggestion proposed that the subject 
should dream of normal or abnormal sexual relations, the dream 
carried out these orders by replacing sexual material by the sym- 
bols with which psychoanalytic dream-interpretation has made 
us familiar . Thus, following the suggestion that the dreamer 
should dream of homosexual relations with a lady friend, this 
friend appeared in the dream carrying a shabby travelling-bag, 
upon which there was a label with the printed words: “For ladies 
only.” The dreamer was believed never to have heard of dream- 
symbolization or of dream-interpretation. Unfortunately, the 
value of this important investigation was diminished by the fact 
that Dr. Schrotter shortly afterwards committed suicide. Of 
his dream-experiments he gave us only a preliminary report in 
the Zentralblatt jiir Psychoanalyse. 

Similar results were reported in 1923 by G. Roffenstein. Espe- 
cially interesting were the experiments performed by Betlheim 
and Hartmann , because they eliminated hypnosis. These authors 
told stories of a crude sexual content to confused patients suffer- 
ing from Korsakoff’s psychosis, and observed the distortions 
which appeared when the material related was reproduced. 60 It 
was shown that the reproduced material contained symbols made 
familiar by the interpretation of dreams (climbing stairs, stab- 
bing and shooting as symbols of coitus, knives and cigarettes as 
symbols of the penis) . Special value was attached to the appear- 
ance of the symbol of climbing stairs, for, as the authors justly 
observed, “a symbolization of this sort could not be effected by a 
conscious wish to distort.” 

Only when we have formed a due estimate of the importance 
of symbolism in dreams can we continue the study of the typical 
dreams which was interrupted in an earlier chapter (p. 165). I 
feel justified in dividing these dreams roughly into two classes: 
first, those which always really have the same meaning, and 
se cor t f1 j those which despite the same or a similar content must 
nevertheless be given the most varied interpretations. Of the 
typical dr eams belonging to the first class I have already dealt 
fairly fully with the examination-dream. 

60 Cfjer Fehlreaktionen be i der Korsokoffschen Psychose, Arch. f. Psy* 
chiatrie, Bd. taii, 1924. 



262 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

On account of their similar affective character, the dreams of 
missing a train deserve to be ranked with the examination- 
dreams; moreover, their interpretation justifies this approxima- 
tion. They are consolation-dreams, directed against another 
anxiety perceived in dreams — the fear of death. “To depart” is 
one of the most frequent and one of the most readily established 
of the death-symbols. The dream therefore says consolingly: 
“Reassure yourself, you are not going to die (to depart),” just 
as the examination-dream calms us by saying: “Don’t be afraid; 
this time, too, nothing will happen to you.” The difficulty in 
understanding both kinds of dreams is due to the fact that the 
anxiety is attached precisely to the expression of consolation. 

The meaning of the “dreams due to dental stimulus” which I 
have often enough had to analyse in my patients escaped me for 
a long time because, much to my astonishment, they habitually 
offered too great a resistance to interpretation. But finally an 
overwhelming mass of evidence convinced me that in the case of 
men nothing other than the masturbatory desires of puberty 
furnish the motive power of these dreams. I shall analyse two 
such dreams, one of which is also a “flying dream.” The two 
dreams were dreamed by the same person — a young man of pro- 
nounced homosexuality which, however, has been inhibited in 
life. 

He is witnessing a performance of Fidelio from the stalls of 
the opera-house; he is sitting next to L., whose personality is 
congenial to Mm, and whose friendship he would like to have . 
Suddenly he flies diagonally right across the stalls; he then puts 
his hand in his mouth and draws out two of his teeth . 

He himself describes the flight by saying that it was as though 
he were thrown into the air. As the opera performed was Fidelio , 
he recalls the words: — 

“He who a charming wife acquires. . . ” 

But the acquisition of even the most charming wife is not among 
the wishes of the dreamer. Two other lines would be more ap- 
propriate: — 

“He who succeeds in the lucky (big) throw 

The friend of a friend to be ” 



THE DREAM-WORK 


263 

The dream thus contains the “lucky (big) throw,” which is not, 
however, a wish-fulfilment only. For it conceals also the painful 
reflection that in his striving after friendship he has often had 
the misfortune to be “thrown out,” and the fear lest this fate may 
be repeated in the case of the young man by whose side he has 
enjoyed the performance of Fidelio . This is now followed by a 
confession, shameful to a man of his refinement, to the effect 
that once, after such a rejection on the part of a friend, his 
profound sexual longing caused him to masturbate twice in 
succession. 

The other dream is as follows: Two university professors of 
his acquaintance are treating him in my place. One of them does 
something to his penis; he is afraid of an operation. The other 
thrusts an iron bar against his mouth , so that he loses one or two 
teeth. He is bound with four silk handkerchiefs. 

The sexual significance of this dream can hardly be doubted. 
The silk handkerchiefs allude to an identification with a homo- 
sexual of his acquaintance. The dreamer, who has never achieved 
coition (nor has he ever actually sought sexual intercourse) with 
men, conceives the sexual act on the lines of masturbation with 
which he was familiar during puberty. 

I believe that the frequent modifications of the typical dream 
due to dental stimulus — that, for example, in which another per- 
son draws the tooth from the dreamer’s mouth — will be made 
intelligible by the same explanation . 61 It may, however, be diffi- 
cult to understand how “dental stimulus” can have come to have 
this significance. But here I may draw attention to the frequent 
“displacement from below to above” which is at the service of 
sexual repression, and by means of which all kinds of sensations 
and intentions occurring in hysteria, which ought to be localized 
in the genitals, may at all events be realized in other, unobjec- 
tionable parts of the body. We have a case of such displacement 
when the genitals are replaced by the face in the symbolism of 
unconscious thought. This is corroborated by the fact that 
61 The extraction of a tooth by another is usually to be interpreted as cas- 
tration (cf. hair-cutting; Stekel). One must distinguish between dreams 
due to dental stimulus and dreams referring to the dentist, such as have 
been recorded, for example, by Coriat (Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse , iii, 
440 ). 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


264 

verbal usage relates the buttocks to the cheeks , 62 and the labia 
minora to the lips which enclose the orifice of the mouth. The 
nose is compared to the penis in numerous allusions, and in each 
case the presence of hair completes the resemblance. Only one 
feature — the teeth — is beyond all possibility of being compared 
in this way; but it is just this coincidence of agreement and dis- 
agreement which makes the teeth suitable for purposes of rep- 
resentation under the pressure of sexual repression. 

I will not assert that the interpretation of dreams due to 
dental stimulus as dreams of masturbation (the correctness of 
which I cannot doubt) has been freed of all obscurity . 63 I 
carry the explanation as far as I am able, and must leave the rest 
unsolved. But I must refer to yet another relation indicated by 
a colloquial expression. In Austria there is in use an indelicate 
designation for the act of masturbation, namely: “To pull one 
out,” or “to pull one off .” 64 I am unable to say whence these 
colloquialisms originate, or on what symbolisms they are 
based; but the teeth would very well fit in with the first of the 
two. 

Dreams of pulling teeth, and of teeth falling out, are inter- 
preted in popular belief to mean the death of a connection. 
Psychoanalysis can admit of such a meaning only at the most as 
a joking allusion to the sense already indicated. 

To the second group of typical dreams belong those in which 
one is flying or hovering, falling, swimming, etc. What do these 
dreams signify? Here we cannot generalize. They mean, as we 
shall learn, something different in each case; only, the sensory 
material which they contain always comes from the same source. 

We must conclude from the information obtained in psycho- 
analysis that these dreams also repeat impressions of our child- 

* 2 [In German “Backen” = cheeks and “Hinterbacken” (lit. “hindcheeks”) 
s= buttocks. — Traits.] 

63 According to C. G. Jung, dreams due to dental stimulus in the case of 
women have the significance of parturition dreams. E. Jones has given 
valuable confirmation of this. The common element of this interpretation 
with that represented above may be found in the fact that in both cases 
(castration-birth) there is a question of removing a part from the whole 
body. 

M Cf. the “biographical” dream on pp. 236-7. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


265 

hood — that is, that they refer to the games involving movement 
which have such an extraordinary attraction for children. Where 
is the uncle who has never made a child fly by running with it 
across the room, with outstretched arms, or has never played at 
falling with it by rocking it on his knee and then suddenly 
straightening his leg, or by lifting it above his head and sud- 
denly pretending to withdraw his supporting hand? At such 
moments children shout with joy and insatiably demand a repe- 
tition of the performance, especially if a little fright and dizzi- 
ness are involved in it. In after years they repeat their sensations 
in dreams, but in dreams they omit the hands that held them, so 
that now they are free to float or fall. We know that all small 
children have a fondness for such games as rocking and see- 
sawing; and when they see gymnastic performances at the circus 
their recollection of such games is refreshed. In some boys the 
hysterical attack consists simply in the reproduction of such 
performances, which they accomplish with great dexterity. Not 
infrequently sexual sensations are excited by these games of 
movement, innocent though they are in themselves. To express 
the matter in a few words: it is these romping games of child- 
hood which are being repeated in dreams of flying, falling, ver- 
tigo, and the like, but the pleasurable sensations are now trans- 
formed into anxiety. But, as every mother knows, the romping 
of children often enough ends in quarrelling and tears. 

I have therefore good reason for rejecting the explanation that 
it is the condition of our cutaneous sensations during sleep, the 
sensation of the movements of the lungs, etc., that evoke dreams 
of flying and falling. As I see it, these sensations have themselves 
been reproduced from the memory to which the dream re- 
fers — that they are therefore dream-content, and not dream- 
souces . 65 

This material, consisting of sensations of motion, similar in 
character, and originating from the same sources, is now used 
for the representation of the most manifold dream-thoughts. 
Dreams of flying or hovering, for the most part pleasurably 
toned, will call for the most widely differing interpretations — 

65 This passage, dealing with dreams of motion, is repeated on account 0 i 
the context. Cf. p. 170. 



*66 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

interpretations of a quite special nature in the case of some 
dreamers, and interpretations of a typical nature in that of 
others. One of my patients was in the habit of dreaming very 
frequently that she was hovering a little way above the street 
without touching the ground. She was very short of stature, and 
she shunned every sort of contamination involved by intercourse 
with human beings. Her dream of suspension — which raised her 
feet above the ground and allowed her head to tower into the 
air — fulfilled both of her wishes. In the case of other dreamers 
of the same sex, the dream of flying had the significance of the 
longing: “If only I were a little bird!” Similarly, others become 
angels at night, because no one has ever called them angels by 
day. The intimate connection between flying and the idea of a 
bird makes it comprehensible that the dream of flying, in the 
case of male dreamers, should usually have a coarsely sensual 
significance 66 ; and we should not be surprised to hear that this 
or that dreamer is always very proud of his ability to fly. 

Dr. Paul Federn (Vienna) has propounded the fascinating 
theory that a great many flying dreams are erection dreams, 
since the remarkable phenomenon of erection, which constantly 
occupies the human phantasy, cannot fail to be impressive as an 
apparent suspension of the laws of gravity (cf. the winged phalli 
of the ancients) . 

It is a noteworthy fact that a prudent experimenter like 
Mourly Void, who is really averse to any kind of interpretation, 
nevertheless defends the erotic interpretation of the dreams of 
flying and hovering . 67 He describes the erotic element as “the 
most important motive factor of the hovering dream,” and re- 
fers to the strong sense of bodily vibration which accompanies 
this type of dream, and the frequent connection of such dreams 
with erections and emissions. 

Dreams of falling are more frequently characterized by anx- 
iety. Their interpretation, when they occur in women, offers no 
difficulty, because they nearly always accept the symbolic mean- 
ing of falling, which is a circumlocution for giving way to an 

eo [A reference to the German slang word “vogeln” (to copulate) from 
“Vogel” (a bird) .—Trans.] 

* T Vber den Traum, Ges. Schriften, Bd. iii. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


267 

erotic temptation. We have not yet exhausted the infantile 
sources of the dream of falling; nearly all children have fallen 
occasionally, and then been picked up and fondled; if they fell 
out of bed at night, they were picked up by the nurse and taken 
into her bed. 

People who dream often, and with great enjoyment, of swim- 
ming, cleaving the waves, etc., have usually been bed-wetters, 
and they now repeat in the dream a pleasure which they have 
long since learned to forgo. We shall soon learn, from one ex- 
ample or another, to what representations dreams of swimming 
easily lend themselves. 

The interpretation of dreams of fire justifies a prohibition of 
the nursery, which forbids children to “play with fire” so that 
they may not wet the bed at night. These dreams also are based 
on reminiscences of the enuresis nocturna of childhood. In my 
Fragment of an Analysis of Hysteria 68 1 have given the complete 
analysis and synthesis of such a dream of fire in connection with 
the infantile history of the dreamer, and have shown for the 
representation of what maturer impulses this infantile material 
has been utilized. 

It would be possible to cite quite a number of other “typical” 
dreams, if by such one understands dreams in which there is a 
frequent recurrence, in the dreams of different persons, of the 
same manifest dream-content. For example: dreams of passing 
through narrow alleys, or a whole suite of rooms; dreams of 
burglars, in respect of whom nervous people take measures of 
precaution before going to bed; dreams of being chased by wild 
animals (bulls, horses); or of being threatened with knives, 
daggers, and lances. The last two themes are characteristic of 
the manifest dream-content of persons suffering from anxiety, 
etc. A special investigation of this class of material would be 
well worth while. In lieu of this I shall offer two observations, 
which do not, however, apply exclusively to typical dreams. 

The more one is occupied with the solution of dreams, the 
readier one becomes to acknowledge that the majority of the 
dreams of adults deal with sexual material and give expression 

68 Collected Papers , vol, Hi, trans. by Alix and James Strachey. Hogartb 
Press, London. 



268 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


to erotic wishes. Only those who really analyse dreams, that is, 
those who penetrate from their manifest content to the latent 
dream-thoughts, can form an opinion on this subject; but never 
those who are satisfied with registering merely the manifest con- 
tent (as, for example, Nacke in his writings on sexual dreams). 
Let us recognize at once that there is nothing astonishing in this 
fact, which is entirely consistent with the principles of dream- 
interpretation. No other instinct has had to undergo so much 
suppression, from the time of childhood onwards, as the sexual 
instinct in all its numerous components: 69 — from no other in- 
stinct are so many and such intense unconscious wishes left over, 
which now, in the sleeping state, generate dreams. In dream- 
interpretation this importance of the sexual complexes must 
never be forgotten, though one must not, of course, exaggerate 
it to the exclusion of all other factors. 

Of many dreams it may be ascertained, by careful interpreta- 
tion, that they may even be understood bisexually, inasmuch as 
they yield an indisputable over-interpretation, in which they 
realize homosexual impulses — that is, impulses which are con- 
trary to the normal sexual activity of the dreamer. But that all 
dreams are to be interpreted bisexually, as Stekel 70 maintains, 
and Adler , 71 seems to me to be a generalization as insusceptible 
of proof as it is improbable, and one which, therefore, I should 
be loth to defend; for I should, above all, be at a loss to know 
how to dispose of the obvious fact that there are many dreams 
which satisfy other than erotic needs (taking the word in the 
widest sense), as, for example, dreams of hunger, thirst, com- 
fort, etc. And other similar assertions, to the effect that “behind 
every dream one finds a reference to death” (Stekel), or that 
every dream shows “an advance from the feminine to the mas- 
culine line” (Adler), seem to me to go far beyond the admissi- 
ble in the interpretation of dreams. The assertion that all dreams 
call for a sexual interpretation, against which there is such an 

69 Cf. Three Contributions to the Theory oj Sex. 

70 W. Stekel, Die Sprache des Traumes , ign, 

71 Alf. Adler, Der Psychische Hermaphroditismus im Leben und in der 
Neurose, in Fortschritte der Medizin, 1910, No. 16, and later papers in the 
Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse, i, 1910-11. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


269 

untiring polemic in the literature of the subject, is quite foreign 
to my Interpretation of Dreams . It will not be found in any of 
the eight editions of this book, and is in palpable contradiction 
to the rest of its contents. 

We have stated elsewhere that dreams which are conspicu- 
ously innocent commonly embody crude erotic wishes, and this 
we might confirm by numerous further examples. But many 
dreams which appear indifferent, in which we should never 
suspect a tendency in any particular direction, may be traced, 
according to the analysis, to unmistakably sexual wish-impulses, 
often of an unsuspected nature. For example, who, before it had 
been interpreted, would have suspected a sexual wish in the 
following dream? The dreamer relates: Between two stately 
palaces there stands , a little way back, a small house, whose 
doors are closed , My wife leads me along the little bit of road 
leading to the house and pushes the door open , and then I slip 
quickly and easily into the interior of a courtyard that slopes 
steeply upwards . 

Anyone who has had experience in the translating of dreams 
will, of course, at once be reminded that penetration into nar- 
row spaces and the opening of locked doors are among the com- 
monest of sexual symbols, and will readily see in this dream a 
representation of attempted coition from behind (between the 
two stately buttocks of the female body). The narrow, steep 
passage is, of course, the vagina; the assistance attributed to 
the wife of the dreamer requires the interpretation that in reality 
it is only consideration for the wife which is responsible for 
abstention from such an attempt. Moreover, inquiry shows that 
on the previous day a young girl had entered the household of 
the dreamer; she had pleased him, and had given him the im- 
pression that she would not be altogether averse to an approach 
of this sort. The little house between the two palaces is taken 
from the reminiscence of the Hradschin in Prague, and once 
more points to the girl, who is a native of that city. 

If, in conversation with my patients, I emphasize the fre- 
quency of the Oedipus dream — the dream of having sexual inter- 
course with one’s mother — I elicit the answer: “I cannot remem- 
ber such a dream.” Immediately afterwards, however, there 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


27O 

arises the recollection of another, an unrecognizable, indifferent 
dream, which the patient has dreamed repeatedly, and which on 
analysis proves to be a dream with this very content — that is, 
yet another Oedipus dream. I can assure the reader that disguised 
dreams of sexual intercourse with the dreamer's mother are far 
more frequent than undisguised dreams to the same effect . 72 
72 X have published a typical example of such a disguised Oedipus dream in 
No. 1 of the Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse (see below) ; another, with a 
detailed analysis, was published in No. 4 of the same journal by Otto Rank. 
For other disguised Oedipus dreams in which the eye appears as a symbol, 
see Rank ( Int . Zeitschr . fur PsA ., i, 1913)* Papers upon eye dreams and 
eye symbolism by Eder, Ferenczi, and Reitler will be found in the same 
issue. The blinding in the Oedipus legend and elsewhere is a substitute for 
castration. The ancients, by the way, were not unfamiliar with the sym- 
bolic interpretation of the undisguised Oedipus dream (see 0 . Rank, Jahrb. 
ii, P- S 3 4: “Thus, a dream of Julius Caesar’s of sexual relations with his 
mother has been handed down to us, which the oneiroscopists interpreted 
as a favourable omen signifying his taking possession of the earth (Mother 
Earth) . Equally well known is the oracle delivered to the Tarquinii, to the 
elect that that one of them would become the ruler of Rome who should 
be the first to kiss his mother (osculum main tulerit ), which Brutus con- 
ceived as referring to Mother Earth (terrain osculo contigit, scilicet quod ea 
communis mater omnium mortalium essetj Livy, I, Ixi) . Cf. here the dream 
of Hippias in Herodotus, VI, 107: “But Hippias led the barbarians to 
Marathon after he had had the following dream- vision the previous night. 
It had seemed to Hippias that he was sleeping with his own mother. He 
concluded from this dream that he would return home to Athens, and 
would regain power, and that he would die in his fatherland in his old age.” 
These myths and interpretations point to a correct psychological insight. 
I have found that those persons who consider themselves preferred or 
favoured by their mothers manifest in life that confidence in themselves, 
and that unshakable optimism, which often seem heroic, and not infre- 
quently compel actual success. 

Typical example of a disguised Oedipus dream: — 

A man dreams: He has a secret affair with a woman whom another man 
wishes to marry. He is concerned lest the other should discover this relation 
and abandon the marriage; he therefore behaves very affectionately to the 
man; he nestles up to him and kisses him. — The facts of the dreamer’s life 
touch the dream-content only at one point. He has a secret affair with a 
married woman, and an equivocal expression of her husband, with whom 
he is on friendly terms, aroused in him the suspicion that he might have 
noticed something of this relationship. There is, however, in reality, yet 
another factor, the mention of which was avoided in the dream, and which 
alone gives the key to it. The life of the husband is threatened by an organic 
malady. His wife is prepared for the possibility of his sudden death, and 


THE DREAM-WORK 


271 

There are dreams of landscapes and localities in which em- 
phasis is always laid upon the assurance: “I have been here 
before.” But this " Deja vu” has a special significance in dreams. 
In this case the locality is always the genitals of the mother; of 
no other place can it be asserted with such certainty that one 
“has been here before.” I was once puzzled by the account of a 
dream given by a patient afflicted with obsessional neurosis. He 
dreamed that he called at a house where he had been twice be- 
fore. But this very patient had long ago told me of an episode 
of his sixth year. At that time he shared his mother’s bed, and 
had abused the occasion by inserting his finger into his mother’s 
genitals while she was asleep. 

A large number of dreams, which are frequently full of 
anxiety, and often have for content the traversing of narrow 
spaces, or staying long in the water, are based upon phantasies 
concerning the intra-uterine life, the sojourn in the mother’s 
womb, and the act of birth. I here insert the dream of a young 
man who, in his phantasy, has even profited by the intra-uterine 
opportunity of spying upon an act of coition between his parents. 

“He is in a deep shaft, in which there is a window, as in the 
Semmering tunnel . Through this he sees at first an empty land- 
scape, and then he composes a picture in it, which is there all at 
once and fills up the empty space . The picture represents a field 
which is being deeply tilled by an implement, and the wholesome 
air, the associated idea of hard work, and the bluish-black clods 
of earth make a pleasant impression on him . He then goes on and 
sees a work on education lying open . . . and is surprised that so 
much attention is devoted in it to the sexual feelings (of chil- 
dren), which makes him think of me, ” 

our dreamer consciously harbours the intention of marrying the young 
widow after her husband’s decease. It is through this objective situation 
that the dreamer finds himself transferred into the constellation of the 
Oedipus dream; his wish is to be enabled to lull the man, so that he may 
win the woman for his wife ; his dream gives expression to the wish in a 
hypocritical distortion. Instead of representing her as already married to 
the other man, it represents the other man only as wishing to marry her, 
which indeed corresponds with his own secret intention, and the hostile 
wishes directed against the man are concealed under demonstrations ol 
affection, which are reminiscences of his childish relations to his father. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


272 

Here is a pretty water-dream of a female patient, which was 
turned to special account in the course of treatment. 

At her usual holiday resort on the . . . Lake , she flings herself 
into the dark water at a place where the pale moon is reflected 
in the water . 

Dreams of this sort are parturition dreams; their interpreta- 
tion is effected by reversing the fact recorded in the manifest 
dream-content; thus, instead of “flinging oneself into the water,” 
read “coming out of the water” — that is, “being bom ” 73 The 
place from which one is born may be recognized if one thinks of 
the humorous sense of the French “la lune” The pale moon thus 
becomes the white “bottom,” which the child soon guesses to be 
the place from which it came. Now what can be the meaning of 
the patient's wishing to be bom at a holiday resort? I asked the 
dreamer this, and she replied without hesitation: “Hasn't the 
treatment made me as though I were born again?” Thus the 
dream becomes an invitation to continue the treatment at this 
summer resort— that is, to visit her there; perhaps it also con- 
tains a very bashful allusion to the wish to become a mother 
herself 7 * 

Another dream of parturition, with its interpretation, I take 
from a paper by E. Jones. “She stood at the seashore watching a 
small boy , who seemed to be hers, wading into the water . This he 
did till the water covered him and she could only see his head 
bobbing up and down near the surface . The scene then changed 
to the crowded hall of an hotel . Her husband left her, and she 
* entered into conversation with ' a stranger . 

“The second half of the dream was discovered in the analysis 

78 For the mythological meaning of water-birth, see Rank: Der Mythus 
von der Gehurt des JSelden, 1909. 

74 It was not for a long time that I learned to appreciate the significance of 
the phantasies and unconscious thoughts relating to life in the womb. They 
contain the explanation of the curious dread, felt by so many people, of 
being buried alive, as well as the profoundest unconscious reason for the 
belief in a life after death, which represents only the projection into the 
future of this mysterious life before birth. The act of birth , moreover, is the 
first experience attended by anxiety, and is thus, the source and model of 
the affect of anxiety . 


THE DREAM-WORK 


273 

to represent flight from her husband, and the entering into in- 
timate relations with a third person, behind whom was plainly 
indicated Mr. X. 5 s brother, mentioned in a former dream. The first 
part of the dream was a fairly evident birth-phantasy. In dreams 
as in mythology, the delivery of a child from the uterine waters 
is commonly represented, by way of distortion, as the entry of 
the child into water; among many other instances, the births of 
Adonis, Osiris, Moses, and Bacchus are well-known illustrations 
of this. The bobbing up and down of the head in the water at once 
recalled to the patient the sensation of quickening which she 
had experienced in her only pregnancy. Thinking of the boy 
going into the water induced a reverie in which she saw herself 
taking him out of the water, carrying him into the nursery, wash- 
ing and dressing him, and installing him in her household. 

“The second half of the dream, therefore, represents thoughts 
concerning the elopement, which belonged to the first half of the 
underlying latent content; the first half of the dream corre- 
sponded with the second half of the latent content, the birth 
phantasy. Besides this inversion in the order, further inversions 
took place in each half of the dream. In the first half the child 
entered the water, and then his head bobbed; in the underlying 
dream-thoughts the quickening occurred first, and then the child 
left the water (a double inversion). In the second half 
her husband left her; in the dream-thoughts she left her hus- 
band.” 

Another parturition dream is related by Abraham — the dream 
of a young woman expecting her first confinement: From one 
point of the floor of the room a subterranean channel leads di- 
rectly into the water ( path of parturition — amniotic fluid). She 
lifts up a trap in the floor , and there immediately appears a crea- 
ture dressed in brownish fur , which almost resembles a seal . This 
creature changes into the dreamer’s younger brother , to whom 
her relation has always been maternal in character . 

Rank has shown from a number of dreams that parturition- 
dreams employ the same symbols as micturition-dreams. The 
erotic stimulus expresses itself in these dreams as an urethral 
stimulus. The stratification of meaning in these dreams cor- 



274 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

responds with a change in the significance of the symbol since 
childhood. 

We may here turn back to the interrupted theme (see p. 36) 
of the part played by organic, sleep-disturbing stimuli in dream- 
formation. Dreams which have come into existence under these 
influences not only reveal quite frankly the wish-fulfilling tend- 
ency, and the character of convenience-dreams, but they very 
often display a quite transparent symbolism as well, since wak- 
ing not infrequently follows a stimulus whose satisfaction in 
symbolic disguise has already been vainly attempted in the 
dream. This is true of emission dreams as well as those evoked 
by the need to urinate or defecate. The peculiar character of 
emission dreams permits us directly to unmask certain sexual 
symbols already recognized as typical, but nevertheless violently 
disputed, and it also convinces us that many an apparently in- 
nocent dream-situation is merely the symbolic prelude to a 
crudely sexual scene. This, however, finds direct representation, 
as a rule, only in the comparatively infrequent emission dreams, 
while it often enough turns into an anxiety-dream, which like- 
wise leads to waking. 

The symbolism of dreams due to urethral stimulus is espe- 
cially obvious, and has always been divined. Hippocrates had 
already advanced the theory that a disturbance of the bladder 
was indicated if one dreamt of fountains and springs (Havelock 
Ellis). Schemer, who has studied the manifold symbolism of 
the urethral stimulus, agrees that “the powerful urethral stim- 
ulus always turns into the stimulation of the sexual sphere and 
its symbolic imagery. . . . The dream due to urethral stimulus is 
often at the same time the representative of the sexual dream.” 

0 . Rank, whose conclusions (in his paper on Die Symbol- 
sckichtung im Wecktraum) I have here followed, argues very 
plausibly that a large number of “dreams due to urethral stim- 
ulus” are really caused by sexual stimuli, which at first seek to 
gratify themselves by way of regression to the infantile form of 
urethral erotism. Those cases are especially instructive in which 
the urethral stimulus thus produced leads to waking and the 
emptying of the bladder, whereupon, in spite of this relief, the 


THE DREAM- WORK 2J$ 

dream is continued, and expresses its need in undisguisedly 
erotic images . 75 

In a quite analogous manner dreams due to intestinal stimu- 
lus disclose the pertinent symbolism, and thus confirm the rela- 
tion, which is also amply verified by ethno-psychology, of gold 
and feces 76 “Thus, for example, a woman, at a time when she is 
under the care of a physician on account of an intestinal dis- 
order, dreams of a digger for hidden treasure who is burying a 
treasure in the vicinity of a little wooden shed which looks like 
a rural privy, A second part of the dream has as its content how 
she wipes the posterior of her child, a little girl, who has soiled 
herself” 

Dreams of “rescue 57 are connected with parturition dreams. 
To rescue, especially to rescue from the water, is, when dreamed 
by a woman, equivalent to giving birth; this sense is, however, 
modified when the dreamer is a man 77 

Robbers, burglars, and ghosts, of which we are afraid before 
going to bed, and which sometimes even disturb our sleep, orig- 
inate in one and the same childish reminiscence. They are the 
nightly visitors who have waked the child in order to set it on 
the chamber, so that it may not wet the bed, or have lifted the 

75 “Xhe same symbolic representations which in the infantile sense consti- 
tute the basis of the vesical dream appear in the ‘recent* sense in purely 
sexual si gnifi cance: water = urine = semen = amniotic fluid; ship = ‘to 
pump ship* (urinate = seed-capsule; getting wet = enuresis = coitus = 
pregnancy; swimming = full bladder = dwelling-place of the unborn; 
rain = urination =symboI of fertilization; traveling (journeying— alight- 
ing) = getting out of bed = having sexual intercourse (honeymoon jour- 
ney) ; urinating = sexual ejaculation” (Rankin, I, c.). 

76 Freud, Ckarakter und Amlerotik; Rank, Die Symbolschictung, etc.; 
Dattner, Intern . Zeitschr. f. Psych . i, 1913 ; Reik, Intern. Zeitschr iii, 1915. 

77 For such a dream see Pfister, Bin Fall von psychoanalytischer Seelensorge 
und Seelenheilung , in Evangelische Freiheit, 1909. Concerning the symbol 
of “rescuing,” see my paper, Die Zukiinjtigen Chancender psyckoanaly - 
tischen Therapie , in Zentralblatt fur Psychoanalyse , No. I, 1910. Also 
Beitrage zur Psychologie des Liebeslebens, i. Vber einen besonderen Typus 
der objektwahl beim Manne , in Jahrbuch fiir FsA., Bd. ii, 1910 (Ges. 
Schriften, Bd. v) . Also Rank, BeUege zur Rettungs-phantasie in the Zentral- 
blatt fur Psychoanalyse, i, 1910? p. 331 ; Reik, Zur Rettungssymbolic; ibid., 
p. 299. 



276 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

coverlet in order to see clearly how the child is holding its hands 
while sleeping. I have been able to induce an exact recollection 
of the nocturnal visitor in the analysis of some of these anxiety- 
dreams. The robbers were always the father; the ghosts more 
probably corresponded to female persons in white night-gowns. 

F. EXAMPLES— ARITHMETIC AND SPEECH IN DREAMS 

Before I proceed to assign to its proper place the fourth of the 
factors which control the formation of dreams, I shall cite a few 
examples from my collection of dreams, partly for the purpose 
of illustrating the cooperation of the three factors with which 
we are already acquainted, and partly for the purpose of adduc- 
ing evidence for certain unsupported assertions which have been 
made, or of bringing out what necessarily follows from them. 
It has, of course, been difficult in the foregoing account of the 
dream-work to demonstrate my conclusions by means of ex- 
amples. Examples in support of isolated statements are con- 
vincing only when considered in the context of an interpretation 
of a dream as a whole; when they are wrested from their con- 
text, they lose their value; on the other hand, a dream-interpre- 
tation, even when it is by no means profound, soon becomes so 
extensive that it obscures the thread of the discussion which it 
is intended to illustrate. This technical consideration must be 
my excuse if I now proceed to mix together all sorts of things 
which have nothing in common except their reference to the 
text of the foregoing chapter. 

We shall first consider a few examples of very peculiar or 
unusual methods of representation in dreams. A lady dreamed 
as follows: A servant-girl is standing on a ladder as though to 
clean the windows , and has with her a chimpanzee and a gorilla 
cat (later corrected, angora cat). She throws the animals on to 
the dreamer; the chimpanzee nestles up to her , and this is very 
disgusting . This dream has accomplished its purpose by a very 
simple means, namely, by taking a mere figure of speech liter- 
ally, and representing it in accordance with the literal meaning 
of its words. “Monkey,” like the names of animals in general, is 


THE DREAM-WORK 


277 

an opprobrious epithet, and the situation of the dream means 
merely “to hurl invectives” This same collection will soon fur- 
nish us with further examples of the employment of this simple 
artifice in the dream-work. 

Another dream proceeds in a very similar manner: A woman 
with a child which has a conspicuously deformed cranium; the 
dreamer has heard that the child acquired this deformity owing 
to its position in its mother’s womb . The doctor says that the 
cranium might be given a better shape by means of compression, 
but that this would injure the brain . She thinks that because it 
is a boy it won’t suffer so much from deformity . This dream 
contains a plastic representation of the abstract concept: “Child- 
ish impressions,” with which the dreamer has become familiar 
in the course of the treatment. 

In the following example the dream-work follows rather a dif- 
ferent course. The dream contains a recollection of an excursion 
to the Hilmteich, near Graz: There is a terrible storm outside ; 
a miserable hotel — the water is drippmg from the walls, and the 
beds are damp . (The latter part of the content was less directly 
expressed than I give it.) The dream signifies “ superfluous ” 
The abstract idea occurring in the dream-thoughts is first made 
equivocal by a certain abuse of language; it has perhaps been 
replaced by “overflowing,” or by “fluid” and “super-fluid 
(-fluous),” and has then been brought to representation by an 
accumulation of like impressions. Water within, water without, 
water in the beds in the form of dampness — everything fluid and 
“'super” fluid. That for the purposes of dream-representation the 
spelling is much less considered than the sound of words ought 
not to surprise us when we remember that rhyme exercises a 
similar privilege. 

The fact that language has at its disposal a great number of 
words which were originally used in a pictorial and concrete 
sense, but are at present used in a colourless and abstract fashion, 
has, in certain other cases, made it very easy for the dream to 
represent its thoughts. The dream has only to restore to these 
words their full significance, or to follow their change of mean* 
ing a little way back. For example, a man dreams that his friend, 



278 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

who is struggling to get out of a very tight place, calls upon him 
for help. The analysis shows that the tight place is a hole, and 
that the dreamer symbolically uses these very words to his 
friend: “Be careful, or you’ll get yourself into a hole .” 78 An- 
other dreamer climbs a mountain from which he obtains an 
extraordinarily extensive view. He identifies himself with his 
brother, who is editing a “review” dealing with the Far East. 

In a dream in Der Grune Heinrich a spirited horse is plunging 
about in a field of the finest oats, every grain of which is really 
“a sweet almond, a raisin and a new penny” wrapped in red silk 
and tied with a bit of pig’s bristle.” The poet (or the dreamer) 
immediately furnishes the meaning of this dream, for the horse 
felt himself pleasantly tickled, so that he exclaimed: “The oats 
are pricking me” (“I feel my oats”). 

In the old Norse sagas (according to Henzen) prolific use is 
made in dreams of colloquialisms and witty expressions; one 
scarcely finds a dream without a double meaning or a play upon 
words. 

It would be a special undertaking to collect such methods of 
representation and to arrange them in accordance with the prin- 
ciples upon which they are based. Some of the representations 
are almost witty. They give one the impression that one would 
have never guessed their meaning if the dreamer himself had not 
succeeded in explaining it. 

1. A man dreams that he is asked for a name, which, however, 
he cannot recall . He himself explains that this means: “I 
shouldn’t dream of it.” 

2. A female patient relates a dream in which all the persons 
concerned were singularly large. “That means,” she adds, “that 
it must deal with an episode of my early childhood, for at that 
time all grown-up people naturally seemed to me immensely 
large.” She herself did not appear in the dream. 

The transposition into childhood is expressed differently in 
other dreams — by the translation of time into space. One sees 
persons and scenes as though at a great distance, at the end of a 
long road, or as though one were looking at them through the 
wrong end of a pair of opera-glasses. 

78 [Given by translator, as the author’s example could not be translated.] 


THE DREAM-WORK 


279 

3. A man who in waking life shows an inclination to employ 
abstract and indefinite expressions, but who otherwise has his 
wits about him, dreams, in a certain connection, that he reaches 
a railway station just as a train is coming in. But then the plat- 
form moves towards the train , which stands still; an absurd in- 
version of the real state of affairs. This detail, again, is nothing 
more than an indication to the effect that something else in the 
dream must be inverted. The analysis of the same dream leads 
to recollections of picture-books in which men were represented 
standing on their heads and walking on their hands. 

4. The same dreamer, on another occasion, relates a short 
dream which almost recalls the technique of a rebus. His uncle 
gives him a kiss in an automobile. He immediately adds the in- 
terpretation, which would never have occurred to me: it means 
auto-erotism . In the waking state this might have been said in 
jest 

5. At a New Year’s Eve dinner the host, the patriarch of the 
family, ushered in the New Year with a speech. One of his sons- 
in-law, a lawyer, was not inclined to take the old man seriously, 
especially when in the course of his speech he expressed himself 
as follows: “When I open the ledger for the Old Year and glance 
at its pages I see everything on the asset side and nothing, thank 
the Lord, on the side of liability; all you children have been a 
great asset , none of you a liability” On hearing this the young 
lawyer thought of X, his wife’s brother, who was a cheat and a 
liar, and whom he had recently extricated from the entangle- 
ments of the law. That night, in a dream, he saw the New Year’s 
celebration once more, and heard the speech, or rather saw it. 
Instead of speaking, the old man actually opened the ledger, 
and on the side marked “assets” he saw his name amongst 
others, but on the other side, marked “liability,” there was the 
name of his brother-in-law, X. However, the word “Liability” 
was changed into “Lie-Ability,” which he regarded as X.’s main 
characteristic. 79 

6. A dreamer treats another person for a broken bone. The 
analysis shows that the fracture represents a broken marriage 
vow, etc. 

70 Reported by Brill in his Fundamental Conceptions of Psychoanalysts. 



zBo THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

7. In the dream-content the time of day often represents a 
certain period of the dreamer’s childhood. Thus, for example, 
5.15 a.m. means to one dreamer the age of five years and three 
months; when he was that age, a younger brother was born. 

8 . Another representation of age in a dream: A woman is 
walking with two little girls; there is a difference of fifteen 
months in their ages . The dreamer cannot think of any family 
of her acquaintance in which this is the case. She herself in- 
terprets it to mean that the two children represent her own per- 
son, and that the dream reminds her that the two traumatic 
events of her childhood were separated by this period of time 
(3% and 4% years). 

9. It is not astonishing that persons who are undergoing 
psychoanalytic treatment frequently dream of it, and are com- 
pelled to give expression in their dreams to all the thoughts and 
expectations aroused by it. The image chosen for the treatment 
is as a rule that of a journey, usually in a motorcar, this being 
a modern and complicated vehicle; in the reference to the speed 
of the car the patient’s ironical humour is given free play. 
If the “ unconscious ” as an element of waking thought, is to be 
represented in the dream, it is replaced, appropriately enough, 
by subterranean localities, which at other times, when there is 
no reference to analytic treatment, have represented the female 
body or the womb. Below in the dream very often refers to the 
genitals, and its opposite, above , to the face, mouth or breast. 
By wild beasts the dream-work usually symbolizes passionate 
impulses; those of the dreamer, and also those of other persons 
of whom the dreamer is afraid; or thus, by means of a very 
slight displacement, the persons who experience these passions. 
From this it is not very far to the totemistic representation of 
the dreaded father by means of vicious animals, dogs, wild 
horses, etc. One might say that wild beasts serve to represent 
the libido, feared by the ego, and combated by repression. Even 
the neurosis itself, the sick person , is often separated from 
the dreamer and exhibited in the dream as an independent 
person. 

One may go so far as to say that the dream-work makes use 
to! all the means accessible to it for the visual representation of 


THE DREAM-WORK. 


281 


the dream-thoughts, whether these appear admissible or inad- 
missible to waking criticism, and thus exposes itself to the doubt 
as well as the derision of all those who have only hearsay knowl- 
edge of dream-interpretation, but have never themselves prac- 
tised it. Stekel’s book, Die Sprache des Traumes, is especially 
rich in such examples, but I avoid citing illustrations from this 
work as the author’s lack of critical judgment and his arbitrary 
technique would make even the unprejudiced observer feel 
doubtful. 

10. From an essay by V. Tausk ( Kleider und Farben int 
Dienste der Traumdarstellung, in Interna . Zeitschr . filr P$A., 
ii, 1914):— 

(a) A. dreams that he sees his former governess wearing a 
dress of black lustre , which fits closely over her buttocks . — That 
means he declares this woman to be lustful. 

( b ) C. in a dream sees a girl on the road to X , bathed in a 
white light and wearing a white blouse. 

The dreamer began an affair with a Miss White on this road. 

11. In an analysis which I carried out in the French language 
I had to interpret a dream in which I appeared as an elephant. 
I naturally had to ask why I was thus represented. “Vous me 
trompez” answered the dreamer ( Trompe = trunk). 

The dream-work often succeeds in representing very refrac- 
tory material, such as proper names, by means of the forced ex- 
ploitation of very remote relations. In one of my dreams old 
Briicke has set me a task. I make a preparation , and pick some- 
thing out of it which looks like crumpled tinfoil . (I shall return 
to this dream later.) The corresponding association, which is 
not easy to find, is stanniol , and now I know that I have in mind 
the name of the author Stannius , which appeared on the title- 
page of a treatise on the nervous system of fishes, which in my 
youth I regarded with reverence. The first scientific problem 
which my teacher set me did actually relate to the nervous sys- 
tem of a fish — the Ammocoetes. Obviously, this name could not 
be utilized in the picture-puzzle. 

Here I must not fail to include a dream with a curious con- 
tent, which is worth noting also as the dream of a child, and 
which is readily explained by analysis. A lady tells me: *‘I can 



282 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


remember that when I was a child I repeatedly dreamed that 
God wore a conical paper hat on His head . They often used to 
make me wear such a hat at table, so that I shouldn’t be able to 
look at the plates of the other children and see how much they 
had received of any particular dish. Since I had heard that God 
was omniscient, the dream signified that I knew everything in 
spite of the hat which I was made to wear.” 

What the dream-work consists in, and its unceremonious 
handling of its material, the dream-thoughts, may be shown in 
an instructive manner by the numbers and calculations which 
occur in dreams. Superstition, by the way, regards numbers as 
having a special significance in dreams. I shall therefore give a 
few examples of this kind from my collection. 

i. From the dream of a lady, shortly before the end of her 
treatment: — 

She wants to pay for something or other; her daughter takes 
3 florins 65 kreuzer from her purse; but the mother says: “What 
are you doing ? It costs only 21 kreuzer ” This fragment of the 
dream was intelligible without further explanation owing to my 
knowledge of the dreamer’s circumstances. The lady was a for- 
eigner, who had placed her daughter at school in Vienna, and 
was able to continue my treatment as long as her daughter re- 
mained in the city. In three weeks the daughter’s scholastic year 
would end, and the treatment would then stop. On the day be- 
fore the dream the principal of the school had asked her whether 
she could not decide to leave the child at school for another year. 
She had then obviously reflected that in this case she would be 
able to continue the treatment for another year. Now, this is 
what the dream refers to, for a year is equal to 363 days; the 
three weeks remaining before the end of the scholastic year, and 
of the treatment, are equivalent to 21 days (though not to so 
many hours of treatment) . The numerals, which in the dream- 
thoughts refer to periods of time, are given money values in the 
dream, and simultaneously a deeper meaning finds expression — 
for “time is money ” 365 kreuzer, of course, are 3 florins 65 
kreuzer. The smallness of the sums which appear in the dream is 
a self-evident wish-fulfilment; the wish has reduced both the 
cost of the treatment and the year’s school fees. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


283 

2 . In another dream the numerals are involved in even more 
complex relations. A young lady, who has been married for some 
years, learns that an acquaintance of hers, of about the same 
age, Elise L., has just become engaged. Thereupon she dreams: 
She is sitting in the theatre with her husband, and one side oj 
the stalls is quite empty . Her husband tells her that Elise L. and 
her fiance had also wished to come to the theatre, but that they 
only could have obtained poor seats; three for 1 florin 50 
kreuzer, and oj course they could not take those. She thinks they 
didn’t lose much, either . 

What is the origin of the 1 florin 5 o kreuzer? A really indiffer- 
ent incident of the previous day. The dreamer’s sister-in-law had 
received 130 florins as a present from her husband, and hastened 
to get rid of them by buying some jewelery. Let us note that 
150 florins is 100 times 1 florin 50 kreuzer. But whence the 3 in 
connection with the seats in the theatre? There is only one asso- 
ciation for this, namely, that the fiance is three months younger 
than herself. When we have ascertained the significance of the 
fact that one side of the stalls is empty we have the solution of 
the dream. This feature is an undisguised allusion to a little in- 
cident which had given her husband a good excuse for teasing 
her. She had decided to go to the theatre that week; she had 
been careful to obtain tickets a few days beforehand, and had 
had to pay the advance booking-fee. When they got to the 
theatre they found that one side of the house was almost empty; 
so that she certainly need not have been in such a hurry. 

I shall now substitute the dream- thoughts for the dream: "It 
surely was nonsense to marry so early; there was no need for my 
being in such a hurry. From Elise L.’s example I see that I should 
have got a husband just the same — and one a hundred times 
better — if I had only waited (antithesis to the haste of her sister- 
in-law), I could have bought three such men for the money (the 
dowry) ! ” — Our attention is drawn to the fact that the numerals 
in this dream have changed their meanings and their relations 
to a much greater extent than in the one previously considered. 
The transforming and distorting activity of the dream has in 
this case been greater — a fact which we interpret as meaning 
that these dream-thoughts had to overcome an unusual degree of 



284 THE interpretation of dreams 

endo-psychic resistance before they attained to representation. 
And we must not overlook the fact that the dream contains an 
absurd element, namely, that two persons are expected to take 
three seats . It will throw some light on the question of the inter- 
pretation of absurdity in dreams if I remark that this absurd de- 
tail of the dream-content is intended to represent the most 
strongly emphasized of the dream-thoughts: “It was nonsense 
to marry so early.” The figure 3, which occurs in a quite sub- 
ordinate relation between the two persons compared (three 
months 7 difference in their ages) , has thus been adroitly utilized 
to produce the idea of nonsense required by the dream. The re- 
duction of the actual 150 florins to 1 florin 50 kreuzer corre- 
sponds to the dreamer’s disparagement of her husband in her 
suppressed thoughts. 

3. Another example displays the arithmetical powers of 
dreams, which have brought them into such disrepute. A man 
dreams: He is sitting in the B.’s house (the B.’s are a family with 
which he was formerly acquainted), and he says: “It was non- 
sense that you didn't give me Amy for my wife” Thereupon , he 
asks the girl: “ How old are you?” Answer: “/ was born in 
1882” “Ah, then you are 28 years old ” 

Since the dream was dreamed in the year 1898, this is obvi- 
ously bad arithmetic, and the inability of the dreamer to calcu- 
late may, if it cannot be otherwise explained, be likened to that 
of a general paralytic. My patient was one of those men who 
cannot help thinking about every woman they see. The patient 
who for some months came next after him in my consulting-room 
was a young lady; he met this lady after he had constantly 
asked about her, and he was very anxious to make a good im- 
pression on her. This was the lady whose age he estimated at 28 . 
So much for explaining the result of his apparent calculation. 
But 1882 was the year in which he had married. He had been un- 
able to refrain from entering into conversation with the two 
other women whom he met at my house — the two by no means 
youthful maids who alternately opened the door to him— and as 
he did not find them very responsive, he had told himself that 
they probably regarded him as elderly and “serious,” 


THE DREAM-WORK 


285 

Bearing in mind these examples, and others of a similar nature 
(to follow), we may say: The dream-work does not calculate at 
all, whether correctly or incorrectly; it only strings together, in 
the form of a sum, numerals which occur in the dream-thoughts, 
and which may serve as allusions to material which is insus- 
ceptible of representation. It thus deals with figures, as material 
for expressing its intentions, just as it deals with all other con- 
cepts, and with names and speeches which are only verbal 
images. 

For the dream-work cannot compose a new speech. No matter 
how many speeches and answers, which may in themselves be 
sensible or absurd, may occur in dreams, analysis always shows 
us that the dream has merely taken from the dream-thoughts 
fragments of speeches which have really been delivered or heard, 
and has dealt with them in the most arbitrary fashion. It has not 
only tom them from their context and mutilated them, accepting 
one fragment and rejecting another, but it has often fitted them 
together in a novel manner, so that the speech which seems co- 
herent in a dream is dissolved by analysis into three or four com- 
ponents. In this new application of the words the dream has 
often ignored the meaning which they had in the dream- thoughts, 
and has drawn an entirely new meaning from them . 80 Upon 
closer inspection the more distinct and compact ingredients of 
the dream-speech may be distinguished from others, which serve 
as connectives, and have probably been supplied, just as we 

80 Analyses of other numerical dreams have been given by Jung, Mardnow- 
ski and others. Such dreams often involve very complicated arithmetical 
operations, which are none the less solved by the dreamer with astonishing 
confidence. Cf. also Ernest Jones, Vber unbewusste Zahlenbehandlmg t 
Zentralb . fur Psychoanalyse 1 4, ii, 1912, p. 241). 

Neurosis behaves in the same fashion. I know a patient who — involun- 
tarily and unwillingly— -hears (hallucinates) songs or fragments of songs 
without being able to understand their significance for her psychic life. She 
is certainly not a paranoiac. Analysis shows that by exercising a certain 
license she gave the text of these songs a false application. “Oh, thou bliss- 
ful one! Oh, thou happy one I” This is the first line of Christmas carol, but 
by not continuing it to the word, Christmastide, she turns it into a bridal 
song, etc. The same mechanism of distortion may operate, without hallu- 
cination, merely in association. 



286 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


supply omitted letters and syllables in reading. The dream- 
speech thus has the structure of breccia , in which the larger 
pieces of various material are held together by a solidified co- 
hesive medium. 

Strictly speaking, of course, this description is correct only for 
those dream-speeches which have something of the sensory char- 
acter of a speech, and are described as “speeches.” The others, 
which have not, as it were, been perceived as heard or spoken 
(which have no accompanying acoustic or motor emphasis in 
tie dream) are simply thoughts, such as occur in our waking 
life, and find their way unchanged into many of our dreams. Our 
reading, too, seems to provide an abundant and not easily trace- 
able source for the indifferent speech-material of dreams. But 
anything that is at all conspicuous as a speech in a dream can be 
referred to actual speeches which have been made or heard by 
the dreamer. 

We have already found examples of the derivation of such 
dream-speeches in the analyses of dreams which have been cited 
for other purposes. Thus, in the “innocent market-dream” (p. 
86-7) where the speech: That is no longer to be had serves to 
identify me with the butcher, while a fragment of the other 
speech: I don’t know that , I don’t take that 9 precisely fulfils the 
task of rendering the dream innocent. On the previous day the 
dreamer, replying to some unreasonable demand on the part of 
her cook, had waved her aside with the words: I don’t know 
that , behave yourself properly , and she afterwards took into the 
dream the first, indifferent-sounding part of the speech in order 
to allude to the latter part, which fitted well into the phantasy 
underlying the dream, but which might also have betrayed it. 

Here is one of many examples which all lead to the same con- 
clusion: 

A large courtyard in which dead bodies are being burned . The 
dreamer says , “Pm going , I can’t stand the sight of it.” (Not a 
distinct speech.) Then he meets two butcher boys and asks, 
“Well, did it taste good?” And one of them answers, “No, it 
wasn’t good.” As though it had been human flesh. 

The innocent occasion of this dream is as follows: After taking 



THE DREAM-WORK 


287 

supper with his wife, the dreamer pays a visit to his worthy but 
by no means appetizing neighbour . The hospitable old lady is 
just sitting down to her own supper, and presses him (among 
men a composite, sexually significant word is used jocosely in 
the place of this word) to taste it. He declines, saying that he 
has no appetite. She replies: “Go on with you , you can manage 
it all right ” or something of the kind. The dreamer is thus forced 
to taste and praise what is offered him. “But that’s goodl ” When 
he is alone again with his wife, he complains of his neighbour’s 
importunity, and of the quality of the food which he has tasted. 
“I can’t stand the sight of it,” a phrase that in the dream, too, 
does not emerge as an actual speech, is a thought relating to the 
physical charms of the lady who invites him, which may be trans- 
lated by the statement that he has no desire to look at her. 

The analysis of another dream — which I will cite at this stage 
for the sake of a very distinct speech, which constitutes its 
nucleus, but which will be explained only when we come to 
evaluate the affects in dreams — is more instructive. I dream very 
vividly: 1 have gone to Brucke f s laboratory at night, and on 
hearing a gentle knocking at the door, 1 open it to ( the deceased ) 
Professor Fleischl, who enters in the company of several 
strangers, and after saying a few words sits down at his table . 
Then follows a second dream: My friend FL has come to Vienna, 
unobtrusively, in July; I meet him in the street, in conversation 
with my (deceased) friend P., and I go with them somewhere, 
and they sit down facing each other as though at a small table, 
while I sit facing them at the narrow end of the table . FI. speaks 
of his sister, and says: “In three-quarters of an hour she was 
dead” and then something like “That is the threshold” As P . 
does not understand him, FL turns to me, and asks me how much 
I have told P . of his affairs . At this, overcome by strange emo- 
tions, I try to tell FL that P. (cannot possibly know anything, 
of course, because he) is not alive . But noticing the mistake my- 
self, I say: “Non vixit.” Then I look searchingly at P., and under 
my gaze he becomes pale and blurred, and his eyes turn a sickly 
blue — and at last he dissolves . I rejoice greatly at this; I now 
understand that Ernst Fleischl, too, is only an apparition, a reve- 



288 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


nant, and I find that it is quite possible that such a person should 
exist only so long as one wishes him to, and that he can be made 
to disappear by the wish of another person . 

This very pretty dream unites so many of the enigmatical 
characteristics of the dream-content — the criticism made in the 
dream itself, inasmuch as I myself notice my mistake in saying 
Non vixit instead of Non vivit, the unconstrained intercourse 
with deceased persons, whom the dream itself declares to be 
dead, the absurdity of my conclusion, and the intense satisfac- 
tion which it gives me — that “I would give my life” to expound 
the complete solution of the problem. But in reality I am in- 
capable of doing what I do in the dream, i.e. of sacrificing such 
intimate friends to my ambition. And if I attempted to disguise 
the facts, the true meaning of the dream, with which I am per- 
fectly familiar, would be spoiled. I must therefore be content to 
select a few of the elements of the dream for interpretation, some 
here, and some at a later stage. 

The scene in which I annihilate P. with a glance forms the 
centre of the dream. His eyes become strange and weirdly blue, 
and then he dissolves. This scene is an unmistakable imitation 
of a scene that was actually experienced. I was a demonstrator 
at the Physiological Institute; I was on duty in the morning, and 
Briicke learned that on several occasions I had been unpunctual 
in my attendance at the students* laboratory. One mprning, 
therefore, he arrived at the hour of opening, and waited for me. 
What he said to me was brief and to the point; but it was not 
what he said that mattered. What overwhelmed me was the ter- 
rible gaze of his blue eyes, before which I melted away — as P. 
does in the dream, for P. has exchanged roles with me, much to 
my relief. Anyone who remembers the eyes of the great master, 
which were wonderfully beautiful even in his old age, and has 
ever seen him angered, will readily imagine the emotions of the 
young transgressor on that occasion. 

But for a long while I was unable to account for the Non vixit 
with which I pass sentence in the dream. Finally, I remembered 
that the reason why these two words were so distinct in the 
dream was not because they were heard or spoken, but because 
they were seen. Then I knew at once where they came from. On 



THE DREAM-WORK 289 

the pedestal of the statue of the Emperor Joseph in the Vienna 
Hofburg are inscribed the following beautiful words: — 

Saluti patriae vixit 
non diu sed totus - 81 

From this inscription I had taken what fitted one inimical train 
of thought in my dream-thoughts, and which was intended to 
mean: “That fellow has nothing to say in the matter, he is not 
really alive.” And I now recalled that the dream was dreamed a 
few days after the unveiling of the memorial to Fleischl, in the 
cloisters of the University, upon which occasion I had once more 
seen the memorial to Briicke, and must have thought with regret 
(in the unconscious) how my gifted friend P., with all his devo- 
tion to science, had by his premature death forfeited his just 
claim to a memorial in these halls. So I set up this memorial to 
him in the dream; Josef is my friend P.’s baptismal name . 82 

According to the rules of dream-interpretation, I should still 
not be justified in replacing non vivit, which I need, by non vixit , 
which is placed at my disposal by the recollection of the Kaiser 
Josef memorial. Some other element of the dream-thoughts must 
have contributed to make this possible. Something now calls my 
attention to the fact that in the dream scene two trains of 
thought relating to my friend P. meet, one hostile, the other 
affectionate — the former on the surface, the latter covered upl- 
and both are given representation in the same words: non vixit . 
As my friend P. has deserved well of science, I erect a memorial 
to him; as he has been guilty of a malicious wish (expressed at 
the end of the dream), I annihilate him. I have here constructed 
a sentence with a special cadence, and in doing so I must have 
been influenced by some existing model. But where can I find a 
similar antithesis, a similar parallel between two opposite re- 

U1 The inscription in fact reads; 

Saluti publicae vixit 
non diu sed totus . 

The motive of the mistake: patriae for publicae , has probably been cor- 
rectly divined by Wittels. 

82 As an example of over-determination: My excuse for coming late was 
that after working late into the night, in the morning I had to make the 
long journey from Kaiser-Josef-Strasse to Wahringer Strasse. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


29O 

actions to the same person, both of which can claim to be wholly 
justified, and which nevertheless do not attempt to affect one an- 
other? Only in one passage which, however, makes a profound 
impression upon the reader — Brutus’s speech of justification in 
Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar; “As Caesar loved me, I weep for 
him; as he was fortunate, I rejoice at it; as he was valiant, I 
honour him; but as he was ambitious, I slew him.” Have we not 
here the same verbal structure, and the same antithesis of 
thought, as in the dream-thoughts? So I am playing Brutus in 
my dream. If only I could find in my dream-thoughts another 
collateral connection to confirm this! I think it might be the 
following: “My friend FI. comes to Vienna in July.” This detail 
is not the case in reality. To my knowledge, my friend has never 
been in Vienna in July. But the month of July is named after 
Julius Caesar, and might therefore very well furnish the required 
allusion to the intermediate thought — that I am playing the 
part of Brutus . 83 

Strangely enough, I once did actually play the part of Brutus. 
When I was a boy of fourteen, I presented the scene between 
Brutus and Caesar in Schiller’s poem to an audience of children: 
with the assistance of my nephew, who was a year older than I, 
and who had come to us from England — and was thus a revenant 
— for in him I recognize the playmate of my early childhood. 
Until the end of my third year we had been inseparable ; we had 
loved each other and fought each other and, as I have already 
hinted, this childish relation has determined all my later feelings 
in my intercourse with persons of my own age. My nephew John 
has since then had many incarnations, which have revivified first 
one and then another aspect of a character that is ineradicably 
fixed in my unconscious memory. At times he must have treated 
me very badly, and I must have opposed my tyrant courageously, 
for in later years I was often told of a short speech in which I 
defended myself when my father — his grandfather — called me 
to account: “Why did you hit John?” “/ hit him because he hit 
me” It must be this childish scene which causes non vivit to be- 
come non vixit, for in the language of later childhood striking is 
known as wichsen (German: wichsen = to polish, to wax, i.e. to 
* 8 And also, Caesar = Kaiser . 



THE DREAM- WORK 


29I 

thrash) ; and the dream- work does not disdain to take advantage 
of such associations. My hostility towards my friend P. 3 which 
has so little foundation in reality — he was greatly my superior, 
and might therefore have been a new edition of my old playmate 
— may certainly be traced to my complicated relations with 
John during our childhood. I shall, as I have said, return to this 
dream later on. 

G. ABSURD DREAM? — INTELLECTUAL PERFORMANCES IN DREAMS 

I 

Hitherto, in our interpretation of dreams, we have come upon 
the element of absurdity in the dream-content so frequently that 
we must no longer postpone the investigation of its cause and its 
meaning. We remember, of course, that the absurdity of dreams 
has furnished the opponents of dream-interpretation with their 
chief argument for regarding the dream as merely the meaning- 
less product of an attenuated and fragmentary activity of the 
psyche. 

I will begin with a few examples in which the absurdity of the 
dream-content is apparent only, disappearing when the dream is 
more thoroughly examined. These are certain dreams which — 
accidentally, one begins by thinking — are concerned with the 
dreamer’s dead father. 

1. Here is the dream of a patient who had lost his father six 
years before the date of the dream: — 

His father had been involved in a terrible accident . He was 
travelling by the night express when the train was derailed , the 
seats were telescoped, and his head was crushed from side to 
side . The dreamer sees him lying on his bed ; from his left eye - 
brow a wound runs vertically upwards . The dreamer is surprised 
that his father should have met with an accident ( since he is 
dead already, as the dreamer adds in relating his dream). His 
father’s eyes are so clear . 

According to the prevailing standards of dream-criticism, this 
dream-content would be explained as follows: At first, while the 
dreamer is picturing his father’s accident, he has forgotten that 
his father has already been many years in his grave; in the 



2 92 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

course of the dream this memory awakens, so that he is surprised 
at his own dream even while he is dreaming it. Analysis, how- 
ever, tells us that it is quite superfluous to seek for such ex- 
planations. The dreamer had commissioned a sculptor to make 
a bust of his father, and he had inspected the bust two days be- 
fore the dream. It is this which seems to him to have come to 
grief (the German word means “gone wrong” or “met with an 
accident”). The sculptor has never seen his father, and has had 
to work from photographs. On the very day before the dream 
the son had sent an old family servant to the studio in order to 
see whether he, too, would pass the same judgment upon the 
marble bust — namely, that it was too narrow between the tem- 
ples. And now follows the memory-material which has contrib- 
uted to the formation of the dream: The dreamer’s father had a 
habit, whenever he was harassed by business cares or domestic 
difficulties, of pressing his temples between his hands, as though 
his head was growing too large and he was trying to compress it. 
When the dreamer was four years old, he was present when a 
pistol was accidentally discharged, and his father’s eyes were 
blackened ( his eyes are so clear ) . When his father was thought- 
ful or depressed, he had a deep furrow in his forehead just where 
the dream shows his wound. The fact that in the dream this 
wrinkle is replaced by a wound points to the second occasion for 
the dream. The dreamer had taken a photograph of his little 
daughter; the plate had fallen from his hand, and when he 
picked it up it revealed a crack which ran like a vertical furrow 
across the child’s forehead, extending as far as the eyebrow. He 
could not help feeling a superstitious foreboding, for on the day 
before his mother’s death the negative of her portrait had been 
cracked. 

Thus, the absurdity of this dream is simply the result of a 
carelessness of verbal expression, which does not distinguish be- 
tween the bust or the photograph and the original. We are all ac- 
customed to making remarks like: “Don’t you think it’s exactly 
your father?” The appearance of absurdity in this dream might, 
of course, have been easily avoided. If it were permissible to 
form an opinion on the strength of a single case, one might be 



THE DREAM- WORK 293 

tempted to say that this semblance of absurdity is admitted or 
even desired. 


II 

Here is another example of the same kind from my own dreams 
(I lost my father in the year 1896) : — 

After his death my father has flayed a fart in the political 
life of the Magyars , and has united them into a political whole ; 
and here I see, indistinctly, a little picture: a number of men, 
as though in the Reichstag; a man is standing on one or two 
chairs; there are others round about him. 1 remember that on 
his death-bed he looked so like Garibaldi, and 1 am glad that this 
promise has really come true. 

Certainly this is absurd enough. It was dreamed at the time 
when the Hungarians were in a state of anarchy, owing to Parlia- 
mentary obstruction, and were passing through the crisis from 
which Koloman Szill subsequently delivered them. The trivial 
circumstance that the scenes beheld in dreams consist of such 
little pictures is not without significance for the elucidation of 
this element. The customary visual dream-representations of 
our thoughts present images that impress us as being life-size; 
my dream-picture, however, is the reproduction of a wood-cut 
inserted in the text of an illustrated history of Austria, repre- 
senting Maria Theresa in the Reichstag of Pressburg — the fa- 
mous scene of Moriamur pro rege nostro Like Maria Theresa, 
my father, in my dream, is surrounded by the multitude; but 
he is standing on one or two chairs ( Stuklen ), and is thus, like 
a Stuhlrichter (presiding judge). (He has united them; here the 
intermediary is the phrase: “We shall need no judge”) Those 
of us who stood about my father’s death-bed did actually notice 
that he looked very like Garibaldi. He had a post-mortem rise 

84 1 have forgotten in what author I found a reference to a dream which 
was overrun with unusually small figures, the source of which proved to be 
one of the engravings of Jacques Callot, which the dreamer had examined 
during the day. These engravings contain an enormous number of very 
small figures; a whole series of them deals with the horrors of the Thirty 
Years War. 



294 the interpretation of dreams 

of temperature; his cheeks shone redder and redder . . . involun- 
tarily we continue: “And behind him, in unsubstantial (radi- 
ance), lay that which subdues us all — the common fate / 5 

This uplifting of our thoughts prepares us for the fact that we 
shall have to deal with this “common fate . 55 The post-mortem 
rise in temperature corresponds to the words “after his death 55 
in the dream-content. The most agonizing of his afflictions had 
been a complete paralysis of the intestines ( obstruction ) dur- 
ing the last few weeks of his life. Ail sorts of disrespectful 
thoughts associate themselves with this. One of my contem- 
poraries, who lost his father while still at the “gymnasium 55 — 
upon which occasion I was profoundly moved, and tendered him 
my friendship — once told me, derisively, of the distress of a 
relative whose father had died in the street, and had been brought 
home, when it appeared, upon undressing the corpse, that at 
the moment of death, or post-mortem, an evacuation of the 
bowels ( Stuhlentleerung ) had taken place. The daughter was 
deeply distressed by this circumstance, because this ugly detail 
would inevitably spoil her memory of her father. We have now 
penetrated to the wish that is embodied in this dream. To stand 
after one 5 s death before one 5 s children great and undefiled: who 
would not wish that? What now has become of the absurdity of 
this dream? The appearance of absurdity was due only to the 
fact that a perfectly permissible figure of speech, in which we 
are accustomed to ignore any absurdity that may exist as be- 
tween its components, has been faithfully represented in the 
dream. Here again we can hardly deny that the appearance of 
absurdity is desired and has been purposely produced. 

The frequency with which dead persons appear in our dreams 
as living and active and associating with us has evoked undue 
astonishment, and some curious explanations, which afford con- 
spicuous proof of our misunderstanding of dreams. And yet the 
explanation of these dreams is close at hand. How often it hap- 
pens that we say to ourselves: “If my father were still alive, 
what would he say to this ? 55 The dream can express this if in no 
other way than by his presence in a definite situation. Thus, for 
instance, a young man whose grandfather has left him a great 
inheritance dreams that the old man is alive, and calls his grand- 



THE DREAM-WORK 


295 

son to account, reproaching him for his lavish expenditure. What 
we regard as an objection to the dream on account of our better 
knowledge that the man is already dead, is in reality the con- 
soling thought that the dead man does not need to learn the 
truth, or satisfaction over the fact that he can no longer have 
a say in the matter. 

Another form of absurdity found in dreams of deceased rela- 
tives does not express scorn and derision; it serves to express the 
extremest repudiation, the representation of a suppressed thought 
which one would like to believe the very last thing one would 
think of. Dreams of this kind appear to be capable of solution 
only if we remember that a dream makes no distinction between 
desire and reality. For example, a man who nursed his father 
during his last illness, and who felt his death very keenly, 
dreamed some time afterwards the following senseless dream: 
His father was again living , and conversing with him as usual , 
hut (and this was the remarkable thing) he had nevertheless 
died, though he did not know it . This dream is intelligible if, 
after “he had nevertheless died,” we insert in consequence of 
the dreamer’s wish , and if after “but he did not know it,” we 
add that the dreamer had entertained this wish . While nursing 
him, the son had often wished that his father was dead; that is, 
he had had the really compassionate thought that it would be a 
good thing if death would at last put an end to his sufferings. 
While he was mourning his father’s death, even this compas- 
sionate wish became an unconscious reproach, as though it had 
really contributed to shorten the sick man’s life. By the awaken- 
ing of the earliest infantile feelings against his father, it became 
possible to express this reproach as a dream; and it was pre- 
cisely because of the extreme antithesis between the dream- 
instigator and the day-thoughts that this dream had to assume 
so absurd a form . 85 

As a general thing, the dreams of a deceased person of whom 
the dreamer has been fond confront the interpreter with difficult 
problems, the solution of which is not always satisfying. The 
reason for this may be sought in the especially pronounced am- 

85 Cf. Formulierungen uber die zwei Prinzipien des seelischen Geschehens , 
in Jahrbuch f. PsA ill, 1, 1911 (Ges. Schriften , Bd. v) . 



296 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

bivalence of feeling which controls the relation of the dreamer 
to the dead person. In such dreams it is quite usual for the de- 
ceased person to be treated at first as living; then it suddenly 
appears that he is dead; and in the continuation of the dream 
he is once more living. This has a confusing effect. I at last 
divined that this alternation of death and life is intended to 
represent the indifference of the dreamer. (“It is all one to me 
whether he is alive or dead”). This indifference, of course, is 
not real, but wished; its purpose is to help the dreamer to deny 
his very intense and often contradictory emotional attitudes, 
and so it becomes the dream-representation of his ambivalence . 
For other dreams in which one meets with deceased persons the 
following rule will often be a guide: If in the dream the dreamer 
is not reminded that the dead person is dead, he sets himself on 
a par with the dead; he dreams of his own death. The sudden 
realization or astonishment in the dream (“but he has long been 
deadl”) is a protest against this identification, and rejects the 
meaning that the dreamer is dead. But I will admit that I feel 
that dream-interpretation is far from having elicited all the 
secrets of dreams having this content. 

Ill 

In the example which I shall now cite, I can detect the dream- 
work in the act of purposely manufacturing an absurdity for 
which there is no occasion whatever in the dream-material. It 
is taken from the dream which I had as a result of meeting Count 
Thun just before going away on a holiday. “/ am driving in a 
cab , and I tell the driver to drive to a railway station . '0/ course , 
I can’t drive with you on the railway track itself I say, after 
the driver has reproached me, as though I had worn him out; 
at the same time , it seems as though I had already made with 
him a journey that one usually makes by train ” Of this con- 
fused and senseless story analysis gives the following explana- 
tion: During the day I had hired a cab to take me to a remote 
street in Dornbach. The driver, however, did not know the way, 
and simply kept on driving, in the manner of such worthy people, 
until I became aware of the fact and showed him the way, in- 
dulging in a few derisive remarks. From this driver a train of 



THE DREAM-WORK 


297 

thought led to the aristocratic personage whom I was to meet 
later on. For the present, I will only remark that one thing that 
strikes us middle-class plebeians about the aristocracy is that 
they like to put themselves in the driver’s seat. Does not Count 
Thun guide the Austrian “car of State 5 ? The next sentence in 
the dream, however, refers to my brother, whom I thus also 
identify with the cab-driver. I had refused to go to Italy with 
him this year (“Of course, I can’t drive with you on the railway 
track itself”), and this refusal was a sort of punishment for his 
accustomed complaint that I usually wear him out on this tour 
(this finds its way into the dream unchanged) by rushing him 
too quickly from place to place, and making him see too many 
beautiful things in a single day. That evening my brother had 
accompanied me to the railway station, but shortly before the 
carriage had reached the Western station of the Metropolitan 
Railway he had jumped out in order to take the train to Purkers- 
dorf. I suggested to him that he might remain with me a little 
longer, as he did not travel to Purkersdorf by the Metropolitan 
but by the Western Railway. This is why, in my dream, I made 
in the cab a journey which one usually makes by train. In reality, 
however, it was the other way about: what I told my brother 
was: “The distance which you travel on the Metropolitan Rail- 
way you could travel in my company on the Western Railway.” 
The whole confusion of the dream is therefore due to the fact 
that in my dream I replace “Metropolitan Railway” by “cab,” 
which, to be sure, does good service in bringing the driver and 
my brother into conjunction. I then elicit from the dream some 
nonsense which is hardly disentangled by elucidation, and which 
almost constitutes a contradiction of my earlier speech (“Of 
course, I cannot drive with you on the railway track itself”). 
But as I have no excuse whatever for confronting the Metro- 
politan Railway with the cab, I must intentionally have given 
the whole enigmatical story this peculiar form in my dream. 

But with what intention? We shall now learn what the ab- 
surdity in the dream signifies, and the motives which admitted 
it or created it. In this case the solution of the mysteiy is as fol- 
lows: In the dream I need an absurdity, and something incom- 
prehensible, in connection with “driving” ( Fahren = riding, 



2Q& THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

driving) because in the dream-thoughts I have a certain opinion 
that demands representation. One evening, at the house of the 
witty and hospitable lady who appears, in another scene of the 
same dream, as the “housekeeper,” I heard two riddles which I 
could not solve. As they were known to the other members of 
the party, I presented a somewhat ludicrous figure in my un- 
successful attempts to find the solutions. They were two puns 
turning on the words Nachkommen (to obey orders — offspring) 
and Vorfahren (to drive — forefathers, ancestry). They ran, J 
Relieve, as follows: — 

“The coachman does it 
At the master’s behests; 

Everyone has it; 

In the grave it rests.” 

(Vorfahren) 

A confusing detail was that the first halves of the two riddles 
were identical: 


“The coachman does it 
At the master’s behests; 

Not everyone has it; 

In the grave it rests.” 

(Nachkommen) 

When I saw Count Thun drive up (vorfahren) in state, and fell 
into the Figaro-like mood, in which one finds that the sole merit 
of such aristocratic gentlemen is that they have taken the trouble 
to be born (to become Nachkommen) , these two riddles became 
intermediary thoughts for the dream-work. As aristocrats may 
readily be replaced by coachmen, and since it was once the cus- 
tom to call a coachman “Herr Schwager” (brother-in-law), the 
work of condensation could involve my brother in the same rep- 
resentation. But the dream-thought at work in the background 
is as follows: It is nonsense to be proud of one’s ancestors (Vor- 
fahren). I would rather be an ancestor (Vorfahr) myself. On 
account of this opinion, “it is nonsense,” we have the nonsense 
in the dream. And now the last riddle in this obscure passage of 



THE DREAM-WORK 299 

the dream is solved — namely chat I have driven before {v or her 
gefahren, vorgefahren) with this driver. 

Thus, a dream is made absurd if there occurs in the dream- 
thoughts, as one of the elements of the contents, the opinion: 
“That is nonsense”; and, in general, if criticism and derision are 
the motives of one of the dreamer’s unconscious trains of thought. 
Hence absurdity is one of the means by which the dream-work 
represents contradiction; another means is the inversion of ma- 
terial relation between the dream-thoughts and the dream-con- 
tent; another is the employment of the feeling of motor inhibi- 
tion. But the absurdity of a dream is not to be translated by a 
simple “no”; it is intended to reproduce the tendency of the 
dream-thoughts to express laughter or derision simultaneously 
with the contradiction. Only with this intention does the dream- 
work produce anything ridiculous. Here again it transforms a 
part of the latent content into a manifest form. 86 

As a matter of fact, we have already cited a convincing ex- 
ample of this significance of an absurd dream. The dream (inter- 
preted without analysis) of the Wagnerian performance which 
lasted until 7.45 a.m., and in which the orchestra is conducted 
from a tower, etc. (see p. 231), is obviously saying: It is a crazy 
world and an insane society. He who deserves a thing doesn’t 
get it, and he who doesn’t care for it does get it. In this way the 
dreamer compares her fate with that of her cousin. The fact that 
dreams of a dead father were the first to furnish us with ex- 
amples of absurdity in dreams is by no means accidental. The 
conditions for the creation of absurd dreams are here grouped 
together in a typical fashion. The authority proper to the father 
has at an early age evoked the criticism of the child, and the 
strict demands which he has made have caused the child, in self- 
defence, to pay particularly close attention to every weakness 

86 Here the dream- work parodies the thought which it qualifies as ridicu- 
lous, in that it creates something ridiculous in relation to it. Heine does the 
same thing when he wishes to deride the bad rhymes of the King of Bavaria. 
He does it by using even worse rhymes: — 

“Herr Ludwig ist ein grosser Poet 
Und singt er, so stiirzt Apollo 
Vor ihm auf die Knie und bittet und fleht, 

Halt ein, ich werde sonst toll, oh !” 



300 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

of his father’s; but the piety with which the father’s personality 
is surrounded in our thoughts, especially after his death, in- 
tensifies the censorship which prevents the expression of his 
criticism from becoming conscious. 

IV 

Here is another absurd dream of a deceased father: — 

I receive a communication from the town council of my native 
city concerning the cost of accommodation in the hospital in the 
year 1831. This was necessitated by a seizure from which I was 
suffering. I make fun of the matter for, in the first place, I was 
not yet born in 1851, and in the second place, my father, to 
whom the communication might refer, is already dead. I go to 
him in the adjoining room, where he is lying in bed, and tell him 
about it. To my surprise he remembers that in the year 1851 he 
was once drunk and had to be locked up or confined. It was when 
he was working for the firm of T. “Then you, too , used to drink?” 
I ask . “ You married soon after?” I reckon that I was born in 
1856, which seems to me to be immediately afterwards . 

In the light of the foregoing exposition, we shall translate the 
insistence with which this dream exhibits its absurdities as a 
sure sign of a particularly embittered and passionate polemic in 
the dream-thoughts. All the greater, then, is our astonishment 
when we perceive that in this dream the polemic is waged openly, 
and that my father is denoted as the person who is made a laugh- 
ing-stock. Such frankness seems to contradict our assumption of 
a censorship controlling the dream-work. The explanation is 
that here the father is only an interposed figure, while the quar- 
rel is really with another person, who appears in the dream only 
in a single allusion. Whereas a dream usually treats of revolt 
against other persons, behind whom the father is concealed, 
here it is the other way about: the father serves as the man of 
straw to represent another, and hence the dream dares to con- 
cern itself openly with a person who is usually hallowed, be- 
cause there is present the certain knowledge that he is not in 
reality intended. We learn of this condition of affairs by con- 
sidering the occasion of the dream. It was dreamed after I had 
heard that an older colleague, whose judgment was considered 


THE DREAM- WORK 


301 

infallible, had expressed disapproval and astonishment on hear- 
ing that one of my patients had already been undergoing psycho- 
analytic treatment at my hands for five years. The introductory 
sentences of the dream allude in a transparently disguised man- 
ner to the fact that this colleague had for a time taken over the 
duties which my father could no longer perform (statement of 
expenses, accommodation in the hospital) ; and when our friendly 
relations began to alter for the worse I was thrown into the same 
emotional conflict as that which arises in the case of a misunder- 
standing between father and son (by reason of the part played 
by the father, and his earlier functions). The dream-thoughts 
now bitterly resent the reproach that I am not making better 
progress, which extends itself from the treatment of this patient 
to other things. Does my colleague know anyone who can get on 
any faster? Does he not know that conditions of this sort are 
usually incurable and last for life? What are four or five years in 
comparison to a whole lifetime, especially when life has been 
made so much easier for the patient during the treatment? 

The impression of absurdity in this dream is brought about 
largely by the fact that sentences from different divisions of the 
dream-thoughts are strung together without any reconciling 
transition. Thus, the sentence, I go to him in the adjoining room % 
etc., leaves the subject from which the preceding sentences are 
taken, and faithfully reproduces the circumstances under which 
I told my father that I was engaged to be married. Thus the 
dream is trying to remind me of the noble disinterestedness 
which the old man showed at that time, and to contrast this with 
the conduct of another newly-introduced person. I now per- 
ceive that the dream is allowed to make fun of my father because 
in the dream-thoughts, in the full recognition of his merits, he is 
held up as an example to others. It is in the nature of every cen- 
sorship that one is permitted to tell untruths about forbidden 
things rather than the truth. The next sentence, to the effect 
that my father remembers that he was once drunk , and was 
locked up in consequence, contains nothing that really relates to 
my father any more. The person who is screened by him is here a 
no less important personage than the great Meynert, in whose 
footsteps I followed with such veneration, and whose attitude 



302 TEE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

towards me, after a short period of favouritism, changed into 
one of undisguised hostility. The dream recalls to me his own 
statement that in his youth he had at one time formed the habit 
of intoxicating himself with chloroform , with the result that he 
had to enter a sanatorium; and also my second experience with 
him, shortly before his death. I had an embittered literary con- 
troversy with him in reference to masculine hysteria, the exist- 
ence of which he denied, and when I visited him during his last 
illness, and asked him how he felt, he described his condition at 
some length, and concluded with the words: “You know, I have 
always been one of the prettiest cases of masculine hysteria.” 
Thus, to my satisfaction, and to my astonishment, he admitted 
what he so long and so stubbornly denied. But the fact that in 
this scene of my dream I can use my father to screen Meynert 
is explained not by any discovered analogy between the two per- 
sons, but by the fact that it is the brief yet perfectly adequate 
representation of a conditional sentence in the dream-thoughts 
which, if fully expanded, would read as follows: “Of course, if I 
belonged to the second generation, if I were the son of a pro- 
fessor or a privy councillor, I should have progressed more rap- 
idly.” In my dream I make my father a professor and a privy 
councillor. The most obvious and most annoying absurdity of 
the dream lies in the treatment of the date 1851, which seems to 
me to be indistinguishable from 1856, as though a difference of 
five years meant nothing whatever . But it is just this one of the 
dream-thoughts that requires expression. Four or five years — 
that is precisely the length of time during which I enjoyed the 
support of the colleague mentioned at the outset; but it is also 
the duration of time I kept my fiancee waiting before I married 
her; and by a coincidence that is eagerly exploited by the dream- 
thoughts, it is also the time I have kept my oldest patient wait- 
ing for a complete cure. “What are five years?” ask the dream- 
thoughts. “That is no time at all to me, that isn’t worth consid- 
eration . I have time enough ahead of me, and just as what you 
wouldn’t believe came true at last, so I shall accomplish this 
also.” Moreover, the number 51, when considered apart from 
the number of the century, is determined in yet another manner 
and in an opposite sense; for which reason it occurs several 



THE DREAM- WORK 


303 

times over in the dream. It is the age at which man seems par- 
ticularly exposed to danger; the age at which I have seen col- 
leagues die suddenly, among them one who had been appointed 
a few days earlier to a professorship for which he had long been 
waiting. 

V 

Another absurd dream which plays with figures: — 

An acquaintance of mine, Herr M., has been attacked in an 
essay by no less a person than Goethe and, as we all think, with 
unjustifiable vehemence . Herr M. is, of course, crushed by this 
attack . He complains of it bitterly at a dinner-party; but his 
veneration for Goethe has not suffered as a result of this per- 
sonal experience . I try to elucidate the temporal relations a 
little, as they seem improbable to me . Goethe died in 1832 ; 
since his attack upon M . must, of course, have taken place 
earlier, M. was at the time quite a young man . It seems plausi- 
ble to me that he was 18 years old . But I do not know exactly 
what the date of the present year is, and so the whole calcula- 
tion lapses into obscurity . The attack, by the way, is contained 
in Goethe’s well-known essay on “Nature” 

We shall soon find the means of justifying the nonsense of 
this dream. Herr M., with whom I became acquainted at a dinner- 
party, had recently asked me to examine his brother, who 
showed signs of general paralysis. The conjecture was right; the 
painful thing about this visit was that the patient gave his 
brother away by alluding to his youthful pranks, though our 
conversation gave him no occasion to do so. I had asked the 
patient to tell me the year of his birth, and had repeatedly got 
him to make trifling calculations in order to show the weakness 
of his memory — which tests, by the way, he passed quite well. 
Now I can see that I behave like a paralytic in the dream (/ do 
not know exactly what the date of the present year is). Other 
material of the dream is drawn from another recent source. The 
editor of a medical periodical, a friend of mine, had accepted 
for his paper a very unfavourable “crushing” review of the last 
book of my Berlin friend, FL, the critic being a very youthful 
reviewer, who was not very competent to pass judgment. X 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


304 

thought I had a right to interfere, and called the editor to ac- 
count; he greatly regretted his acceptance of the review, but he 
would not promise any redress. I thereupon broke off my rela- 
tions with the periodical, and in my letter of resignation I ex- 
pressed the hope that our personal relations would not suffer as 
a result of the incident. The third source of this dream is an 
account given by a female patient — it was fresh in my memory 
at the time — of the psychosis of her brother who had fallen into 
a frenzy crying “Nature, Nature ” The physicians in attendance 
thought that the cry was derived from a reading of Goethe’s 
beautiful essay, and that it pointed to the patient’s overwork in 
the study of natural philosophy. I thought, rather, of the sexual 
meaning in which even our less cultured people use the word 
“Nature,” and the fact that the unfortunate man afterwards 
mutilated his genitals seems to show that I was not far wrong. 
Eighteen years was the age of this patient at the time of this 
access of frenzy. 

If I add, further, that the book of my so severely criticized 
friend (“One asks oneself whether the author or oneself is crazy” 
had been the opinion of another critic) treats of the temporal 
conditions of life, and refers the duration of Goethe’s life to the 
multiple of a number significant from the biological point of 
view, it will readily be admitted that in my dream I am putting 
myself in my friend’s place. (7 try to elucidate the temporal re- 
lations a little .) But I behave like a paretic, and the dream revels 
in absurdity. This means that the dream-thoughts say, ironic- 
ally: “Naturally, he is the fool, the lunatic, and you are the 
clever people who know better. Perhaps, however, it is the other 
way about?” Now, “the other way about ” is abundantly repre- 
sented in my dream, inasmuch as Goethe has attacked the young 
man, which is absurd, while it is perfectly possible even to-day 
for a young fellow to attack the immortal Goethe and inasmuch 
as I reckon from the year of Goethe 3 s death, while I made the 
paretic reckon from the year of his birth . 

But I have further promised to show that no dream is in- 
spired by other than egoistical motives. Accordingly, I must ac- 
count for the fact that in this dream I make my friend’s cause 
my own, and put myself in his place. My critical conviction in 



THE DREAM- WORK 


305 

waking life would not justify my doing so. Now, the story of the 
eighteen-year-old patient, and the divergent interpretations of 
his cry, “Nature” allude to the fact that I have put myself into 
opposition to the majority of physicians by claiming a sexual 
etiology for the psychoneuroses. I may say to myself: “You will 
meet with the same kind of criticism as your friend; indeed you 
have already done so to some extent” ; so that I may now replace 
the “he” in the dream-thoughts by “we.” “Yes, you are right; 
we two are the fools.” That mea res agitur is clearly shown by 
the mention of the short, incomparably beautiful essay of 
Goethe’s, for it was a popular lecture on this essay which in- 
duced me to study the natural sciences when I left the gym- 
nasium, and was still undecided as to my future. 

VI 

I have to show that yet another dream in which my ego does 
not appear is none the less egoistic. On p. 167 I referred to a 
short dream in which Professor M. says: “My son, the myopic 
. . and I stated that this was only a preliminary dream, pre- 
ceding another in which I play a part. Here is the main dream, 
previously omitted, which challenges us to explain its absurd and 
unintelligible word-formation. 

On account of something or other that is happening in Rome 
it is necessary for the children to flee , and this they do . The 
scene is then laid before a gate , a double gate in the ancient style 
( the Porta Romana in Siena, as 1 realize while 1 am dreaming ). 
/ am sitting on the edge of a well, and I am greatly depressed; 
1 am almost weeping . A woman — a nurse , a nun — brings out the 
two boys and hands them over to their father, who is not myself . 
The elder is distinctly my eldest son, but I do not see the face of 
the other boy. The woman asks the eldest boy for a parting kiss . 
She is remarkable for a red nose . The boy refuses her the kiss , 
but says to her , extending her his hand in parting, “Auf Geseres,” 
and to both of us ( or to one of us) “Auf Ungeseres.” 1 have the 
idea that this indicates a preference . 

This dream is built upon a tangle of thoughts induced by a 
play I saw at the theatre, called Das neue Ghetto (“The New 
Ghetto”). The Jewish question, anxiety as to the future of my 



30 6 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

children, who cannot be given a fatherland, anxiety as to edu- 
cating them so that they may enjoy the privileges of citizens — 
all these features may easily be recognized in the accompanying 
dream-thoughts. 

“By the waters of Babylon we sat down and wept.” Siena, 
like Rome, is famous for its beautiful fountains. In the dream I 
have to find some sort of substitute for Rome (cf. p. 96) from 
among localities which are known to me. Near the Porta Romana 
of Siena we saw a large, brightly-lit building, which we learned 
was the Manicomio, the insane asylum. Shortly before the dream 
I had heard that a co-religionist had been forced to resign a posi- 
tion, which he had secured with great effort, in a State asylum. 

Our interest is aroused by the speech: “Auf Geseres ” where 
one might expect, from the situation continued throughout the 
dream, “Auf Wiedersehen” (Au revoir) , and by its quite mean- 
ingless antithesis: “ Auf Ungeseres” (“ Un ” is a prefix meaning 
“not.”) 

According to information received from Hebrew scholars, 
Geseres is a genuine Hebrew word, derived from the verb goiser ; 
and may best be rendered by “ordained sufferings, fated dis- 
aster.” From its employment in the Jewish jargon one would 
take it to mean “wailing and lamentation.” Ungeseres is a coin- 
age of my own, and is the first to attract my attention, but for 
the present it baffles me. The little observation at the end of the 
dream — that Ungeseres indicates an advantage over Geseres — 
opens the way to the associations, and therewith to understand- 
ing. This relation holds good in the case of caviare; the unsalted 
kind 87 is more highly prized than the salted. “Caviare to the 
general” — “noble passions.” Herein lies concealed a jesting allu- 
sion to a member of my household, of whom I hope — for she is 
younger than I — that she will watch over the future of my chil- 
dren; this, too, agrees with the fact that another member of my 
household, our worthy nurse, is clearly indicated by the nurse 
(or nun) of the dream. But a connecting-link is wanting be- 
tween the pair, salted — unsalted and Geseres — Ungeseres. This 

87 [Note the resemblance of Geseres and Ungeseres to the German words 
for salted and unsalted — gesalzen and ungesahen; also to the words gesauert 
and ungesauert , leavened and unleavened. — Trans.] 



THE DREAM-WORK 


307 

is to be found in gesauert and ungesauert (leavened and un- 
leavened) . In their flight or oxodus from Egypt the children of 
Israel had not time to allow their dough to become leavened, 
and in commemoration of this event they eat unleavened bread 
at Passover to this day. Here, too, I can find room for the sudden 
association which occurred to me in this part of the analysis. I 
remembered how we, my friend from Berlin and myself, had 
strolled about the streets of Breslau, a city which was strange 
to us, during the last days of Easter. A little girl asked me the 
way to a certain street; I had to tell her that I did not know it; 
I then remarked to my friend, “I hope that later on in life the 
child will show more perspicacity in selecting the persons whom 
she allows to direct her.” Shortly afterwards a sign caught my 
eye: “Dr. Herod , consulting hours ...” I said to myself: “I 
hope this colleague does not happen to be a children’s specialist.” 
Meanwhile, my friend had been developing his views on the 
biological significance of bilateral symmetry , and had begun a 
sentence with the words: “If we had only one eye in the middle 
of the forehead, like Cyclops . . .” This leads us to the speech of 
the professor in the preliminary dream: “My son, the myopic” 
And now I have been led to the chief source for Geseres. Many 
years ago, when this son of Professor M.’s, who is to-day an in- 
dependent thinker, was still sitting on his school-bench, he con- 
tracted an affection of the eye which, according to the doctor, 
gave some cause for anxiety. He expressed the opinion that so 
long as it was confined to one eye it was of no great significance, 
but that if it should extend to the other eye it would be serious. 
The affection subsided in the one eye without leaving any ill 
effects; shortly afterwards, however, the same symptoms did 
actually appear in the other eye. The boy’s terrified mother im- 
mediately summoned the physician to her distant home in the 
country. But the doctor was now of a different opinion (took 
the other side ) . “What sort of ‘ Geseres * is this you are making ?” 
he asked the mother, impatiently. “If one side got well , the 
other will , too” And so it turned out. 

And now as to the connection between this and myself and 
my family. The school-bench upon which Professor M.’s son 
learned his first lessons has become the property of my eldest 



308 the interpretation oe dreams 

son; it was given to him by the boy’s mother, and it is into his 
mouth that I put the words of farewell in the dream. One of the 
wishes that may be connected with this transference may now 
be readily guessed. This school-bench is intended by its con- 
struction to guard the child from becoming shortsighted and 
one-sided. Hence myopia (and behind it the Cyclops), and the 
discussion about bilateralism. The fear of one-sidedness has a 
twofold significance; it might mean not only physical one-sided- 
ness, but intellectual one-sidedness also. Does it not seem as 
though the scene in the dream, with all its craziness, were con- 
tradicting precisely this anxiety? When on the one hand the 
boy has spoken his words of farewell, on the other hand he calls 
out the very opposite, as though to establish an equilibrium. He 
is acting, as it were, in obedience to bilateral symmetry! 

Thus, a dream frequently has the profoundest meaning in the 
places where it seems most absurd. In all ages those who have 
had something to say and have been unable to say it without 
danger to themselves have gladly donned the cap and bells. He 
for whom the forbidden saying was intended was more likely to 
tolerate it if he was able to laugh at it, and to flatter himself 
with the comment that what he disliked was obviously absurd. 
Dreams behave in real life as does the prince in the play who is 
obliged to pretend to be a madman, and hence we may say of 
dreams what Hamlet said of himself, substituting an unintel- 
ligible jest for the actual truth: “I am but mad north-north- 
west; when the wind is southerly I know a hawk fiom a hand- 
saw” (Act II, sc. ii ). 88 

Thus, my solution of the problem of absurdity in dreams is 
that the dream-thoughts are never absurd — at least, not those 
of the dreams of sane persons — and that the dream-work pro- 
duces absurd dreams, and dreams with individually absurd 

88 This dream famishes a good example in support of the universally valid 
doctrine that dreams of the same night, even though they are separated in 
the memory, spring from the same thought-material. The dream-situation 
in which I am rescuing my children from the city of Rome, moreover, is 
distorted by a reference back to an episode of my childhood. The meaning 
is that I envy certain relatives who years ago had occasion to transplant 
their children to the soil of another country. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


3°9 

elements, when the dream-thoughts contain criticism, ridicule, 
and derision, which have to be given expression. My next concern 
is to show that the dream-work is exhausted by the co-operation 
of the three factors enumerated — and of a fourth which has still 
to be mentioned — that it does no more than translate the dream- 
thoughts, observing the four conditions prescribed, and that the 
question whether the mind goes to work in dreams with all its 
intellectual faculties, or with only part of them, is wrongly 
stated, and does not meet the actual state of affairs. But since 
there are plenty of dreams in which judgments are passed, criti- 
cisms made, and facts recognized in which astonishment at some 
individual element of the dream appears, and explanations are 
attempted, and arguments adduced, I must meet the objections 
deriving from these occurrences by the citation of selected 
examples. 

My answer is as follows: Everything in dreams which occurs 
as the apparent functioning of the critical faculty is to be re- 
garded, not as the intellectual performance of the dream-work, 
but as belonging to the substance of the dream-thoughts , and it 
has found its way from these , as a completed structure, into the 
manifest dream-content . I may go even farther than this! I may 
even say that the judgments which are passed upon the dream 
as it is remembered after waking , and the feelings which are 
aroused by the reproduction of the dream, belong largely to the 
latent dream-content, and must be fitted into place in the inter- 
pretation of the dream. 

1. One striking example of this has already been given. A fe- 
male patient does not wish to relate her dream because it was too 
vague . She saw a person in the dream, and does not know 
whether it was her husband or her father ♦ Then follows a second 
dream-fragment, in which there occurs a “manure-pail,” with 
which the following reminiscence is associated. As a young 
housewife she once declared jestingly, in the presence of a young 
male relative who frequented the house, that her next business 
would be to procure a new manure-pail. Next morning one was 
sent to her, but it was filled with lilies of the valley. This part of 
the dre am served to represent the phrase, “Not grown on my 



310 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

own manure.” 89 If we complete the analysis, we find in the 
dream- thoughts the after-effect of a story heard in youth; 
namely, that a girl had given birth to a child, and that it was 
not clear who was the father . The dream-representation here 
overlaps into the waking thought, and allows one of the elements 
of the dream-thoughts to be represented by a judgment, formed 
in the waking state, of the whole dream. 

2. A similar case: One of my patients has a dream which strikes 
him as being an interesting one, for he says to himself, imme- 
diately after waking: “I must tell that to the doctor ” The dream 
is analysed, and shows the most distinct allusion to an affair in 
which he had become involved during the treatment, and of 
which he had decided to tell me nothing . 90 

3. Here is a third example from my own experience: — 

1 go to the hospital with P., through a neighbourhood in which 
there are houses and gardens . Thereupon I have an idea that I 
have already seen this locality several times in my dreams . I do 
not know my way very well; P. shows me a way which leads 
round a corner to a restaurant (indoor); here I ask for Frau 
Doniy and I hear that she is living at the back of the house , in a 
small room , with three children . I go there , and on the way I 
meet an undefined person with my two little girls . After I have 
been with them for a while , I take them with me. A sort of re- 
proach against my wife for having left them there. 

On waking I am conscious of a great satisfaction , whose mo- 
tive seems to be the fact that I shall now learn from the analysis 
what is meant by “I have already dreamed of this .” 91 But the 
analysis of the dream tells me nothing about this; it shows me 
only that the satisfaction belongs to the latent dream-content, 
and not to a judgment of the dream. It is satisfaction concerning 

89 [This German expression is equivalent to our saying: “I am not respon- 
sible for that,” “That’s not my funeral,” or “That’s not due to my own 
efforts.”— Trans.] 

"The injunction or resolve already contained in the dream: "I must tell 
that to the doctor” when it occurs in dreams during psycho analytic treat- 
ment, is constantly accompanied by a great resistance to confessing the 
dream, and is not infrequently followed by the forgetting of the dream. 

91 A subject which has been extensively discussed in recent volumes of the 
Revue Pkilosopkique (paramnesia in dreams) . 



THE DREAM-WORK 


312 

the fact that I have had children by my marriage . P.’s path 
through life and my own ran parallel for a time ; now he has out- 
stripped me both socially and financially, but his marriage has 
remained childless. Of this the two occasions of the dream give 
proof on complete analysis. On the previous day I had read in 

the newspaper the obituary notice of a certain Frau Dona A y 

(which I turn into Doni), who had died in childbirth; I was 
told by my wife that the dead woman had been nursed by the 
same midwife whom she herself had employed at the birth of 
our two youngest boys. The name Dona had caught my atten- 
tion, for I had recently met with it for the first time in an English 
novel. The other occasion for the dream may be found in the 
date on which it was dreamed; this was the night before the 
birthday of my eldest boy, who, it seems, is poetically gifted. 

4. The same satisfaction remained with me after waking from 
the absurd dream that my father, after his death, had played a 
political role among the Magyars. It is motivated by the per- 
sistence of the feeling which accompanied the last sentence of 
the dream: “I remember that on his deathbed he looked so like 
Garibaldi , and I am glad that it has really come true " (Fol- 

lowed by a forgotten continuation .) I can now supply from the 
analysis what should fill this gap. It is the mention of my second 
boy, to whom I have given the baptismal name of an eminent 
historical personage who attracted me greatly during my boy- 
hood, especially during my stay in England. I had to wait for a 
year before I could fulfill my intention of using this name if the 
next child should be a son, and with great satisfaction I greeted 
him by this name as soon as he was born. It is easy to see how 
the father’s suppressed desire for greatness is, in his thoughts, 
transferred to his children; one is inclined to believe that this is 
one of the ways by which the suppression of this desire (which 
becomes necessary in the course of life) is effected. The little 
fellow won his right to inclusion in the text of this dream by 
virtue of the fact that the same accident — that of soiling his 
clothes (quite pardonable in either a child or in a dying person) 
— had occurred to him. Compare with this the allusion Stuhl- 
richter (presiding judge) and the wash of the dream: to stand 
before one’s children great and undefiled . 



312 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

5. If I should now have to look for examples of judgments or 
expressions of opinion which remain in the dream itself, and are 
not continued in, or transferred to, our waking thoughts, my 
task would be greatly facilitated were I to take my examples 
from dreams which have already been cited for other purposes. 
The dream of Goethe’s attack on Herr M. appears to contain 
quite a number of acts of judgment. I try to elucidate the tem- 
poral relations a little , as they seem improbable to me . Does not 
this look like a critical impulse directed against the nonsensical 
idea that Goethe should have made a literary attack upon a 
young man of my acquaintance? “It seems plausible to me that 
he was 18 years old” That sounds quite like the result of a cal- 
culation, though a silly one; and the “I do not know exactly what 
is the date of the present year” would be an example of uncer- 
tainty or doubt in dreams. 

But I know from analysis that these acts of judgment, which 
seem to have been performed in the dream for the first time, ad- 
mit of a different construction, in the light of which they become 
indispensable for interpreting the dream, while at the same time 
all absurdity is avoided. With the sentence “I try to elucidate 
the temporal relations a little” I put myself in the place of my 
friend, who is actually trying to elucidate the temporal relations 
of life. The sentence then loses its significance as a judgment 
which objects to the nonsense of the previous sentences. The 
interposition, “Which seems improbable to me” belongs to the 
following: “It seems plausible to me” With almost these iden- 
tical words I replied to the lady who told me of her brother’s ill- 
ness: “It seems improbable to me” that the cry of “Nature. 
Nature,” was in any way connected with Goethe; it seems much 
more plausible to me that it has the sexual significance which is 
known to you. In this case, it is true, a judgment was expressed, 
but in reality, not in a dream, and on an occasion which is re- 
membered and utilized by the dream-thoughts. The dream- 
content appropriates this judgment like any other fragment of 
the dream-thoughts. 

The number 18 with which the judgment in the dream is mean- 
inglessly connected still retains a trace of the context from which 
the real judgment was taken. Lastly, the “1 do not know exactly 


THE DREAM-WORK 


3*3 

what is the date of the present year ” is intended for no other 
purpose than that of my identification with the paralytic, in 
examining whom this particular fact was established. 

In the solution of these apparent acts of judgment in dreams, 
it will be well to keep in mind the above-mentioned rule of inter- 
pretation, which tells us that we must disregard the coherence 
which is established in the dream between its constituent parts 
as an unessential phenomenon, and that every dream-element 
must be taken separately and traced back to its source. The 
dream is a compound, which for the purposes of investigation 
must be broken up into its elements. On the other hand, we 
become alive to the fact that there is a psychic force which ex- 
presses itself in our dreams and establishes this apparent coher- 
ence; that is, the material obtained by the dream-work under- 
goes a secondary elaboration. Here we have the manifestations 
of that psychic force which we shall presently take into consider- 
ation as the fourth of the factors which co-operate in dream- 
formation. 

6. Let us now look for other examples of acts of judgment in 
the dreams which have already been cited. In the absurd dream 
about the communication from the town council, I ask the ques- 
tion, " You married soon after?” 1 reckon that I was born in 
1856 , which seems to me to be directly afterwards . This certainly 
takes the form of an inference . My father married shortly after 
his attack, in the year 1851. 1 am the eldest son, bom in 1856; 
so this is correct. We know that this inference has in fact been 
falsified by the wish-fulfilment, and that the sentence which 
dominates the dream-thoughts is as follows: Four or five years — 
that is no time at all — that need not be counted. But every part 
of this chain of reasoning may be seen to be otherwise determined 
from the dream-thoughts, as regards both its content and its 
form. It is the patient of whose patience my colleague complains 
who intends to marry immediately the treatment is ended. The 
manner in which I converse with my father in this dream re- 
minds me of an examination or cross-examination, and thus of a 
university professor who was in the habit of compiling a com- 
plete docket of personal data when entering his pupils 5 names: 
You were bora when? — 1856, — Patre ? — Then the applicant 



314 the interpretation of dreams 

gave the Latin form of the baptismal name of the father and we 
students assumed that the Hofrat drew inferences from the 
father’s name which the baptismal name of the candidate would 
not always have justified. Hence, the drawing of inferences in 
the dream would be merely the repetition of the drawing of 
inferences which appears as a scrap of material in the dream- 
thoughts. From this we learn something new. If an inference 
occurs in the dream-content, it assuredly comes from the dream- 
thoughts; but it may be contained in these as a fragment of 
remembered material, or it may serve as the logical connective 
of a series of dream-thoughts. In any case, an inference in the 
dream represents an inference taken from the dream-thoughts . 92 

It will be well to continue the analysis of this dream at this 
point. With the inquisition of the professor is associated the 
recollection of an index (in my time published in Latin) of the 
university students; and further, the recollection of my own 
course of study. The five years allowed for the study of medicine 
were, as usual, too little for me, I worked unconcernedly for 
some years longer; my acquaintances regarded me as a loafer, 
and doubted whether I should “get through.” Then, suddenly, 
I decided to take my examinations, and I “got through” in spite 
of the postponement . A fresh confirmation of the dream-thoughts 
with which I defiantly meet my critics: “Even though you won’t 
believe it, because I am taking my time, I shall reach the con- 
clusion (German, Schluss = end, conclusion, inference ). It has 
often happened like that.” 

In its introductory portion this dream contains several sen- 
tences which, we can hardly deny, are of the nature of an argu- 
ment. And this argument is not at all absurd; it might just as 
well occur in my waking thoughts. In my dream I make fun of 
the communication from the town council , for in the first place I 
was not yet born in 1851 , and in the second place my father, to 
whom it might refer, is already dead. Not only is each of these 
statements perfectly correct in itself, but they are the very argu- 

92 These results correct at several points my earlier statements concerning 
the representation of logical relations (p. 200 ff.). These described the gen- 
eral procedure of the dream-work, but overlooked its most delicate and 
most careful operations. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


3 IS 

ments that I should employ if I received such a communication. 
We know from the foregoing analysis (p. 300) that this dream 
has sprung from the soil of deeply embittered and scornful 
dream-thoughts; and if we may also assume that the motive of 
the censorship is a very powerful one, we shall understand that 
the dream-thought has every occasion to create a flawless refuta- 
tion of an unreasonable demand , in accordance with the pattern 
contained in the dream-thoughts. But the analysis shows that in 
this case the dream-work has not been required to make a free 
imitation, but that material taken from the dream-thoughts had 
to be employed for the purpose. It is as though in an algebraic 
equation there should occur, besides the figures, plus and minus 
signs, and symbols of powers and of roots, and as though some- 
one, in copying this equation, without understanding it, should 
copy both the symbols and the figures, and mix them all up to- 
gether. The two arguments may be traced to the following ma- 
terial: It is painful to me to think that many of the hypotheses 
upon which I base my psychological solution of the psycho- 
neuroses will arouse scepticism and ridicule when they first 
became known. For instance, I shall have to assert tfrat impres- 
sions of the second year of life, and even the first, leave an 
enduring trace upon the emotional life of subsequent neuropaths, 
and that these impressions — although greatly distorted and ex- 
aggerated by the memory — may furnish the earliest and pro- 
foundest basis of a hysterical symptom. Patients to whom I 
explain this at a suitable moment are wont to parody my expla- 
nation by offering to search for reminiscenes of the period when 
they were not yet born . My disclosure of the unsuspected part 
played by the father in the earliest sexual impulses of female 
patients may well have a similar reception. (Cf. the discussion 
on p. 154 ff.) Nevertheless, it is my well-founded conviction that 
both doctrines are true. In confirmation of this I recall certain 
examples in which the death of the father occurred when the 
child was very young, and subsequent incidents, otherwise in- 
explicable, proved that the child had unconsciously preserved 
recollections of the person who had so early gone out of its life. 
I know that both my assertions are based upon inferences whose 
validity will be attacked. It is the doing of the wish-fulfilment 



316 the interpretation of dreams 

that precisely the material of those inferences, which I fear will 
be contested, should be utilized by the dream-work for establish- 
ing incontestable conclusions . 

7. In one dream, which I have hitherto only touched upon, 
astonishment at the subject emerging is distinctly expressed at 
the outset. 

“The elder Brucke must have set me some task or other; 
strangely enough , it relates to the preparation of the lower part 
of my own body , the pelvis and legs, which I see before me as 
though in the dissecting-room, but without feeling the absence 
of part of my body, and without a trace of horror . Louise N. is 
standing beside me, and helps me in the work . The pelvis is evis- 
cerated; now the upper, now the lower aspect is visible, and the 
two aspects are commingled . Large fleshy red tubercles are visible 
(which, even in the dream , make me think of haemorrhoids ). 
Also something lying over them had to be carefully picked off; 
it looked like crumpled tinfoil?* Then I was once more in pos- 
session of my legs, and I made a journey through the city, but 1 
took a cab (as I was tired). To my astonishment , the cab drove 
into the fwnt door of a house, which opened and allowed it to 
pass into a corridor, which was broken off at the end, and even- 
tually led on into the open ?* Finally I wandered through chang- 
ing landscapes, with an Alpine guide, who carried my things . He 
carried me for some distance, out of consideration for my tired 
legs. The ground was swampy; we went along the edge; people 
were sitting on the ground, like Red Indians or gypsies; among 
them a girl . Until then I had made my way along on the slippery 
ground, in constant astonishment that 1 was so well able to do 
so after making the preparation . At last we came to a small 
wooden house with an open window at one end . Here the guide 
set me down, and laid two planks, which stood in readiness , on 
the window-sill so as to bridge the chasm which had to be crossed 
from the window. Now 1 grew really alarmed about my legs. In- 
stead of the expected crossing, I saw two grown-up men lying 

93 Stanniol, allusion to Stannius; the nervous system of fishes; cf. p. 281. 
84 The place in the corridor of my apartment-house where the perambu- 
lators of the other tenants stand; it is also otherwise hyper-determined 
several times over. 


the dream-work: 


317 

upon wooden benches which were fixed on the walls 0} the 
hut, and something like two sleeping children next to them; as 
though not the planks but the children were intended to make 
the crossing possible . I awoke with terrified thoughts. 

Anyone who has been duly impressed by the extensive nature 
of dream-condensation will readily image what a number of 
pages the exhaustive analysis of this dream would fill. Fortu- 
nately for the context, I shall make this dream only the one 
example of astonishment in dreams, which makes its appearance 
in the parenthetical remark, <e strangely enough Let us con- 
sider the occasion of the dream. It is a visit of this lady, Louise 
N., who helps me with my work in the dream. She says: “Lend 
me something to read.” I offer her She, by Rider Haggard. “A 
strange book, but full of hidden meaning,” I try to explain; “the 

eternal feminine, the immortality of our emotions ” Here 

she interrupts me: “I know that book already. Haven’t you 
something of your own?” “No, my own immortal works are still 
unwritten.” “Well, when are you going to publish your so-called 
'latest revelations, 3 which, you promised us, even we should be 
able to read?” she asks, rather sarcastically. I now perceive that 
she is a mouthpiece for someone else, and I am silent. I think of 
the effort it cost me to make public even my work on dreams, in 
which I had to surrender so much of my own intimate nature. 
(“The best that you know you can’t tell the boys.”) The prep- 
aration of my own body which I am ordered to make in my 
dream is thus the self-analysis involved in the communication 
of my dreams. The elder Briicke very properly finds a place 
here; in the first years of my scientific work it so happened that 
I neglected the publication of a certain discovery until his in- 
sistence forced me to publish it. But the further trains of thought, 
proceeding from my conversation with Louise N., go too deep 
to become conscious; they are side-tracked by way of the material 
which has been incidentally awakened in me by the mention of 
Rider Haggard’s She. The comment “ strangely enough ” applies 
to this book, and to another by the same author, The Heart of 
the World; and numerous elements of the dream are taken from 
these two fantastic romances. The swampy ground over which 
the dreamer is carried, the chasm which has to be crossed by 



31 8 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

means of planks, come from She; the Red Indians, the girl, and 
the wooden house, from The Heart of the World . In both novels 
a woman is the leader, and both treat of perilous wandering; 
She has to do with an adventurous journey to an undiscovered 
country, a place almost untrodden by the foot of man. Accord- 
ing to a note which I find in my record of the dream, the fatigue 
in my legs was a real sensation from those days. Probably a 
weary mood corresponded with this fatigue, and the doubting 
question: “How much farther will my legs carry me?” In She 
the end of the adventure is that the heroine meets her death in 
the mysterious central fire, instead of winning immortality for 
herself and for others. Some related anxiety has mistakably 
arisen in the dream-thoughts. The “wooden house” is assuredly 
also a coffin — that is, the grave. But in representing this most 
unwished-for of all thoughts by means of a wish-fulfilment, the 
dream-work has achieved its masterpiece. I was once in a grave, 
but it was an empty Etruscan grave near Orvieto — a narrow 
chamber with two stone benches on the walls, upon which were 
lying the skeletons of two adults. The interior of the wooden 
house in the dream looks exactly like this grave, except that 
stone has been replaced by wood. The dream seems to say: “If 
you must already sojourn in your grave, let it be this Etruscan 
grave,” and by means of this interpolation it transforms the most 
mournful expectation into one that is really to be desired. Un- 
fortunately, as we shall learn, the dream is able to change into 
its opposite only the idea accompanying an affect, but not always 
the affect itself. Hence, I awake with “thoughts of terror,” even 
after the idea that perhaps my children will achieve what has 
been denied to their father has forced its way to representation: 
a fresh allusion to the strange romance in which the identity of 
a character is preserved through a series of generations covering 
two thousand years. 

8. In the context of another dream there is a similar expres- 
sion of astonishment at what is experienced in the dream. This, 
however, is connected with such a striking, far-fetched, and al- 
most intellectual attempt at explanation that if only on this 
account I should have to subject the whole dream to analysis, 
even if it did not possess two other interesting features. On the 


THE DREAM-WORK 


319 

night of the eighteenth of July I was travelling on the Southern 
Railway, and in my sleep I heard someone call out: “HolUkurn, 
10 minutes” I immediately think 0 f Holothuria — of a natural 
history museum — that here is a place where valiant men have 
vainly resisted the domination of their overlord . — Yes, the 
counter-reformation in Austria! — As though it were a place in 
Styria or the Tyrol . Now I see indistinctly a small museum , in 
which the relics or the acquisitions of these men are preserved . 
I should like to leave the train, but 1 hesitate to do so. There are 
women with fruit on the platform; they squat on the ground, 
and in that position invitingly hold up their baskets . — 1 hesi- 
tated, in doubt as to whether we have time , but here we are still 
stationary . — I am suddenly in another compart7nent, in which 
the leather and the seats are so narrow that one’s spine directly 
touches the back?* 1 am surprised at this, but 1 may have 
changed carriages while asleep . Several people, among them an 
English brother and sister; a row of books plainly on a shelf on 
the wall . — I see <( The Wealth of Nations,” and “Matter and 
Motion” (by Maxwell), thick books bound in brown linen. The 
man asks his sister about a book of Schiller’s, whether she has 
forgotten it. These books seem to belong now to me, now to them. 
At this point I wish to join in the conversation in order to confirm 
or support what is being said . ... I wake sweating all over, be- 
cause all the windows are shut. The train stops at Marburg . 

While writing down the dream, a part of it occurs to me which 
my memory wished to pass over. I tell the brother and sister (in 
English ), referring to a certain book: “It is from . . but I cor- 
rect myself: “It is by . . ” The man remarks to his sister: “He 
said it correctly 

The dream begins with the name of a station, which seems to 
have almost waked me. For this name, which was Marburg, I 
substitute Hollthurn . The fact that I heard Marburg the first, 
or perhaps the second time it was called out, is proved by the 
mention of Schiller in the dream; he was born in Marburg, 

95 This description is not intelligible even to myself, but I follow the prin- 
ciple of reproducing the dream in those words which occur to me while I 
am writing it down. The wording itself is a part of the dream-representa- 
tion. 



320 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

though not the Styrian Marburg . 96 Now on this occasion, al- 
though I was travelling first class, I was doing so under very 
disagreeable circumstances. The train was overcrowded; in my 
compartment I had come upon a lady and gentleman who seemed 
very fine people, and had not the good breeding, or did not think 
it worth while, to conceal their displeasure at my intrusion. My 
polite greeting was not returned, and although they were sitting 
side by side (with their backs to the engine), the woman before 
my eyes hastened to pre-empt the seat opposite her, and next to 
the window, with her umbrella; the door was immediately 
closed, and pointed remarks about the opening of windows were 
exchanged. Probably I was quickly recognized as a person hun- 
gry for fresh air. It was a hot night, and the atmosphere of the 
compartment, closed on both sides, was almost suffocating. My 
experience as a traveller leads me to believe that such inconsider- 
ate and overbearing conduct marks people who have paid for 
their tickets only partly, or not at all. When the conductor came 
round, and I presented my dearly bought ticket, the lady ex- 
claimed haughtily and almost threateningly: “My husband has 
a pass.” She was an imposing-looking person, with a discontented 
expression, in age not far removed from the autumn of feminine 
beauty; the man had no chance to say anything; he sat there 
motionless. I tried to sleep. In my dream I take a terrible revenge 
on my disagreeable travelling companions; no one would suspect 
what insults and humiliations are concealed behind the disjointed 
fragments of the first half of the dream. After this need has been 
satisfied, the second wish, to exchange my compartment for an- 
other, makes itself felt. The dream changes its scene so often, 
and without making the slightest objection to such changes, that 
it would not have seemed at all remarkable had I at once, from 
my memories, replaced my travelling companions by more agree- 
able persons. But here was a case where something or othe~ 
opposes the change of scene, and finds it necessary to explain it. 
5)6 Schiller was not born in one of the Marburgs , but in Mar bach, as every 
German schoolboy knows, and as I myself knew. This again is one of those 
errors which creep in as substitutes for an intentional falsification in an- 
other place and which I have endeavoured to explain in The Psycho - 
pathology of Everyday Life . 



THE DREAM-WORK 


321 

How did I suddenly get into another compartment? I could not 
positively remember having changed carriages* So there was 
only one explanation: 1 must have left the carriage while asleep 
— an unusual occurrence, examples of which, however, axe known 
to neuropathologists* We know of persons who undertake rail- 
way journeys in a crepuscular state, without betraying their ab- 
normal condition by any sign whatever, until at some stage of 
their journey they come to themselves, and are surprised by the 
gap in their memory. Thus, while I am still dreaming, I declare 
my own case to be such a case of automatisme ambulatoire. 

Analysis permits of another solution. The attempt at expla- 
nation, which so surprises me if I am to attribute it to the dream- 
work, is not original, but is copied from the neurosis of one of 
my patients. I have already spoken in another chapter of a highly 
cultured and kindly man who began, shortly after the death of 
his parents, to accuse himself of murderous tendencies, and who 
was distressed by the precautionary measures which he had to 
take to secure himself against these tendencies. His was a case 
of severe obsessional idea with full insight. To begin with, it was 
painful to him to walk through the streets, as he was obsessed 
by the necessity of accounting for all the persons he met; he had 
to know whither they had disappeared; if one of them suddenly 
eluded his pursuing glance, he was left with a feeling of distress 
and the idea that he might possibly have made away with the 
man. Behind this obsessive idea was concealed, among other 
things, a Cain-phantasy, for “all men are brothers.” Owing to 
the impossibility of accomplishing this task, he gave up going 
for walks, and spent his life imprisoned within his four walls. 
But reports of murders which had been committed in the world 
outside were constantly reaching his room by way of the news- 
papers, and his conscience tormented him with the doubt that 
he might be the murderer for whom the police were looking. 
The certainty that he had not left the house for weeks protected 
him for a time against these accusations, until one day there 
dawned upon him the possibility that he might have left his 
house while in an unconscious state , and might thus have com- 
mitted murder without knowing anything about iL From that 



322 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

time onwards he locked his front door, and gave the key to his 
old housekeeper, strictly forbidding her to give it into his hands, 
even if he demanded it. 

This, then, is the origin of the attempted explanation that I 
may have changed carriages while in an unconscious state; it 
has been taken into the dream ready-made, from the material of 
the dream-thoughts, and is evidently intended to identify me 
with the person of my patient. My memory of this patient was 
awakened by natural association. My last night journey had 
been made a few weeks earlier in his company. He was cured, 
and we were going into the country together to his relatives, who 
had sent for me; as we had a compartment to ourselves, we left 
all the windows open throughout the night, and for as long as I 
remained awake we had a most interesting conversation. I knew 
that hostile impulses towards his father in childhood, in a sexual 
connection, had been at the root of his illness. By identifying 
myself with him I wanted to make an analogous confession to 
myself. The second scene of the dream really resolves itself into 
a wanton phantasy to the effect that my two elderly travelling 
companions had acted so uncivilly towards me because my 
arrival on the scene had prevented them from exchanging kisses 
and embraces during the night, as they had intended. This phan- 
tasy, however, goes back to an early incident of my childhood 
when, probably impelled by sexual curiosity, I had intruded into 
my parents’ bedroom, and was driven thence by my fathers 
emphatic command. 

I think it would be superfluous to multiply such examples. 
They would all confirm what we have learned from those already 
cited: namely, that an act of judgment in a dream is merely the 
repetition of an original act of judgment in the dream-thoughts. 
In most cases it is an unsuitable repetition, fitted into an inap- 
propriate context; occasionally, however, as in our last example, 
it is so artfully applied that it may almost give one the impres- 
sion of independent intellectual activity in the dream. At this 
point we might turn our attention to that psychic activity which* 
though it does not appear to co-operate constantly in the forma- 
tion of dreams, yet endeavours to fuse the dream-elements of dif- 
ferent origin into a flawless and significant whole. We consider 


THE DREAM-WORK 


323 

it necessary, however, first of all to consider the expressions of 
affect which appear in dreams, and to compare these with the 
affects which analysis discovers in the dream-thoughts. 

H. THE AFFECTS IN DREAMS 

A shrewd remark of Strieker's called our attention to the fact 
that the expressions of affects in dreams cannot be disposed of 
in the contemptuous fashion in which we are wont to shake off 
the dream-content after we have waked. “If I am afraid of rob- 
bers in my dreams, the robbers, to be sure, are imaginary, but 
the fear of them is real”; and the same thing is true if I rejoice 
in my dream. According to the testimony of our feelings, an 
affect experienced in a dream is in no way inferior to one of like 
intensity experienced in waking life, and the dream presses its 
claim to be accepted as part of our real psychic experiences, by 
virtue of its affective rather than its ideational content. In the 
waking state we do not put the one before the other, since we 
do not know how to evaluate an affect psychically except in 
connection with an ideational content. If an affect and an idea 
are ill-matched as regards their nature or their intensity, our 
waking judgment becomes confused. 

The fact that in dreams the ideational content does not always 
produce the affective result which in our waking thoughts we 
should expect as its necessary consequence has always been a 
cause of astonishment. Striimpell declared that ideas in dreams 
are stripped of their psychic values. But there is no lack of in- 
stances in which the reverse is true; when an intensive manifes- 
tation of affect appears in a content which seems to offer no 
occasion for it. In my dream I may be in a horrible, dangerous, 
or disgusting situation, and yet I may feel no fear or aversion; 
on the other hand, I am sometimes terrified by harmless things, 
and sometimes delighted by childish things. 

This enigma disappears more suddenly and more completely 
than perhaps any other dream-problem if we pass from the mani- 
fest to the latent content. We shall then no longer have to explain 
it, for it will no longer exist. Analysis tells us that the ideational 
contents have undergone displacements and substitutions , while 
the affects have remained unchanged . No wonder, then, that the 



324 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

ideational content which has been altered by dream-distortion 
no longer fits the affect which has remained intact; and no cause 
for wonder when analysis has put the correct content into its 
original place . 97 

In a psychic complex which has been subjected to the influence 
of the resisting censorship, the affects are the unyielding constit- 
uent, which alone can guide us to the correct completion. This t 
state of affairs is revealed in the psychoneuroses even more dis- 
tinctly than in dreams. Here the affect is always in the right, at 
least as regards its quality; its intensity may, of course, be 
increased by displacement of the neurotic attention. When the 
hysterical patient wonders that he should be so afraid of a trifle, 
or when the sufferer from obsessions is astonished that he should 
reproach himself so bitterly for a mere nothing, they are both 
in error, inasmuch as they regard the conceptual content — the 
trifle, the mere nothing — as the essential thing, and they defend 
themselves in vain, because they make this conceptual content 
the starting-point of their thought-work. Psychoanalysis, how- 
ever, puts them on the right path, inasmuch as it recognizes that, 
on the contrary, it is the affect that is justified, and looks for 
the concept which pertains to it, and which has been repressed 
by a substitution. All that we need assume is that the liberation 
of affect and the conceptual content do not constitute the indis- 
soluble organic unity as which we are wont to regard them, but 
that the two parts may be welded together, so that analysis will 
separate them. Dream-interpretation shows that this is actually 
the case. 

97 If I am not greatly mistaken, the first dream which I was able to elicit 
from my grandson (aged 20 months) points to the fact that the dream- 
work had succeeded in transforming its material into a wish-fulfilment, 
while the affect which belonged to it remained unchanged even in the sleep- 
ing state. The night before its father was to return to the front the child 
cried out, sobbing violently: “Papa, Papa — Baby.” That may mean: Let 
Papa and Baby still be together ; while the weeping takes cognizance of the 
imminent departure. The child was at the time very well able to ex- 
press the concept of separation. “Fort” (= away, replaced by a peculiarly 
accented, long-drawn out 000 oh) had been his first word, and for many 
months before this first dream he had played at “away” with all his toys; 
which went back to his early self-conquest in allowing his mother to go 
away. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


32S 

I will first of all give an example in which analysis explains 
the apparent absence of affect in a conceptual content which 
ought to compel a liberation of affect. 

I 

The dreamer sees three lions in a desert , one of which is laugh- 
ing, but she is not afraid of them . Then, however, she must have 
fled from them, for she is trying to climb a tree . But she finds 
that her cousin, the French teacher, is already up in the tree , etc . 

The analysis yields the following material: The indifferent 
occasion of dream was a sentence in the dreamer’s English exer- 
cise: “The lion's greatest adornment is his mane.” Her father 
used to wear a beard which encircled his face like a mane . The 
name of her English teacher is Miss Lyons . An acquaintance of 
hers had sent her the ballads of Loewe ( Loewe = lion). These, 
then, are the three lions; why should she be afraid of them? She 
has read a story in which a Negro who has incited his fellows to 
revolt is hunted with bloodhounds, and climbs a tree to save him- 
self. Then follow fragmentary recollections in the merriest mood, 
such as the following directions for catching lions (from Die 
Fliegende Blatter) : “Take a desert and put it through a sieve; 
the lions will be left behind.” Also a very amusing, but not very 
proper anecdote about an official who is asked why he does not 
take greater pains to win the favour of his chief, and who replies 
that he has been trying to creep into favour, but that his imme- 
diate superior was already up there . The whole matter becomes 
intelligible as soon as one learns that on the dream-day the lady 
had received a visit from her husband’s superior. He was very 
polite to her, and kissed her hand, and she was not at all afraid 
of him, although he is a “big bug” ( Grosses Tier = big animal) 
and plays the part of a “ social lion” in the capital of her country. 
This lion is, therefore, like the lion in A Midsummer Night's 
Dream, who is unmasked as Snug the joiner; and of such stuff 
are all the dream-lions of which one is not afraid. 

II 

As my second example, I will cite the dream of the girl who saw 
her sister’s little son lying as a corpse in his coffin, but who, it 



326 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

may be added, was conscious of no pain or sorrow. Why she was 
unmoved we know from the analysis. The dream only disguised 
her wish to see once more the man she loved; the affect had to 
be attuned to the wish, and not to its disguisement. There was 
thus no occasion for sorrow. 

In a number of dreams the affect does at least remain con- 
nected with the conceptual content which has replaced the con- 
tent really belonging to it. In others, the dissolution of the 
complex is carried farther. The affect is entirely separated from 
the idea belonging to it, and finds itself accommodated else- 
where in the dream, where it fits into the new arrangement of 
the dream-elements. We have seen that the same thing happens 
to acts of judgment in dreams. If an important inference occurs 
in the dream-thoughts, there is one in the dream also ; but the 
inference in the dream may be displaced to entirely different 
material. Not infrequently this displacement is effected in ac- 
cordance with the principal of antithesis. 

I will illustrate the latter possibility by the following dream, 
which I have subjected to the most exhaustive analysis. 

Ill 

A castle by the sea; afterwards it lies not directly on the coast, 
but on a narrow canal leading to the sea . A certain Herr P. is 
the governor of the castle . I stand with him in a large salon with 
three windows , in front of which rise the projections of a wall , 
like battlements of a fortress. I belong to the garrison , perhaps 
as a volunteer naval officer. We fear the arrival of enemy war- 
ships, for we are in a state of war . Herr P . intends to leave the 
castle ; he gives me instructions as to what must be done if what 
we fear should come to pass . His sick wife and his children are 
in the threatened castle . As soon as the bombardment begins , the 
large hall is to be cleared . He breathes heavily, and tries to get 
away; I detain him, and ask him how I am to send him news in 
case of need. He says something further, and immediately after- 
wards he sinks to the floor dead . I have probably taxed him un- 
necessarily with my questions. After his death, which makes no 
further impression upon me, 1 consider whether the widow is to 
remain in the castle, whether 1 should give notice of the death to 



THE DREAM-WORK 


32 7 

the higher command , whether 1 should take over the control of 
the castle as the next in command . I now stand at the window , 
and scrutinize the ships as they pass by; they are cargo steamers, 
and they rush by over the dark water; several with more than 
one funnel , others with bulging decks (these are very like the 
railway stations in the preliminary dream, which has not been 
related). Then my brother is standing beside me , and we both 
look out of the window on to the canal. At the sight of one ship 
we are alarmed , and call out: u Eere comes the warship!” It 
turns out, however, that they are only the ships which / have 
already seen, returning. Now comes a small ship , comically 
truncated, so that it ends amidships; on the deck one sees curious 
things like cups or little boxes. We call out as with one voice: 
(C That is the breakfast ship.” 

The rapid motion of the ships, the deep blue of the water, the 
brown smoke of the funnels — all these together produce an in- 
tense and gloomy impression. 

The localities in this dream are compiled from several jour- 
neys to the Adriatic (Miramare, Duino, Venice, Aquileia). A 
short but enjoyable Easter trip to Aquileia with my brother, a 
few weeks before the dream, was still fresh in my memory; also 
the naval war between America and Spain, and, associated with 
this my anxiety as to the fate of my relatives in America, play a 
part in the dream. Manifestations of affect appear at two places 
in this dream. In one place an affect that would be expected is 
lacking: it is expressly emphasized that the death of the governor 
makes no impression upon me; at another point, when I see the 
warships, I am frightened, and experience all the sensations of 
fright in my sleep. The distribution of affects in this well- 
constructed dream has been effected in such a way that any 
obvious contradiction is avoided. For there is no reason why I 
should be frightened at the governor’s death, and it is fitting 
that, as the commander of the castle, I should be alarmed by the 
sight of the warship. Now analysis shows that Herr P. is nothing 
but a substitute for my own ego (in the dream I am his substi- 
tute) . I am the governor who suddenly dies. The dream-thoughts 
deal with the future of my family after my premature death. No 
other disagreeable thought is to be found among the dream- 



328 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

thoughts. The alarm which goes with the sight of the warship 
must be transferred from it to this disagreeable thought. In- 
versely, the analysis shows that the region of the dream-thoughts 
from which the warship comes is laden with most cheerful remi- 
niscences. In Venice, a year before the dream, one magically beau- 
tiful day, we stood at the windows of our room on the Riv. 
Schiavoni and looked out over the blue lagoon, on which there was 
more traffic to be seen than usual. Some English ships were 
expected; they were to be given a festive reception; and sud- 
denly my wife cried, happy as a child: “Here comes the English 
warship !” In the dream I am frightened by the very same 
words; once more we see that speeches in dreams have their 
origin in speeches in real life. I shall presently show that even 
the element “English” in this speech has not been lost for the 
dream-work. Here, then, between the dream-thoughts and the 
dream-content, I turn joy into fright, and I need only point to 
the fact that by means of this transformation I give expression 
to part of the latent dream-content. The example shows, how- 
ever, that the dream-work is at liberty to detach the occasion 
of an affect from its connections in the dream-thoughts, and to 
insert it at any other place it chooses in the dream-content. 

I will take the opportunity which is here incidentally offered 
of subjecting to a closer analysis the “breakfast ship,” whose 
appearance in the dream so absurdly concludes a situation that 
has been rationally adhered to. If I look more closely at this 
dream-object, I am impressed after the event by the fact that it 
was black, and that by reason of its truncation at its widest beam 
it achieved, at the truncated end, a considerable resemblance to 
an object which had aroused our interest in the museums of the 
Etruscan cities. This object was a rectangular cup of black clay, 
with two handles, upon which stood things like coffee-cups or 
tea-cups, very similar to our modern service for the breakfast 
table . Upon inquiry we learned that this was the toilet set of an 
Etruscan lady, with little boxes for rouge and powder; and we 
told one another jestingly that it would not be a bad idea to take 
a thing like that home to the lady of the house. The dream- 
object, therefore, signifies a “ black toilet” (toilette — dress), 
or mourning, and refers directly to a death. The other end of the 


THE DREAM-WORK 


329 

dream-object reminds us of the “boat” (German, Nachen, from 
the Greek root, vexvs 7 as a philological friend informs me), upon 
which corpses were laid in prehistoric times, and were left to be 
buried by the sea. This is associated with the return of the ships 
in the dream. 

“Silently on his rescued boat the old man drifts into harbour.” 

It is the return voyage after the ship wreck (German: Scltiff- 
bruch = ship -breaking) ; the breakfast ship looks as though it 
were broken off amidships. But whence comes the name “break- 
fast” ship? This is where “English” comes in, which we have 
left over from the warships. Breakfast , a breaking of the fast ♦ 
Breaking again belongs to shipwreck (Schiff-bruch) 7 and fasting 
is associated with the black (mourning). 

But the only thing about this breakfast ship which has been 
newly created by the dream is its name. The thing existed in 
reality, and recalls to me one of the merriest moments of my last 
journey. As we distrusted the fare in Aquileia, we took some 
food with us from Goerz, and bought a bottle of the excellent 
Istrian wine in Aquileia; and while the little mail-steamer slowly 
travelled through the canale delle Mee and into the lonely ex- 
panse of lagoon in the direction of Grado, we had breakfast on 
deck in the highest spirits — we were the only passengers — and 
it tasted to us as few breakfasts have ever tasted. This, then, 
was the “ breakfast ship ” and it is behind this very recollection 
of the gayest foie de vivre that the dream hides the saddest 
thoughts of an unknown and mysterious future. 

The detachment of affects from the groups of ideas which have 
occasioned their liberation is the most striking thing that hap- 
pens to them in dream-formation, but it is neither the only nor 
even the most essential change which they undergo on the way 
from the dream-thoughts to the manifest dream. If the affects 
in the dream-thoughts are compared with those in the dream, 
one thing at once becomes clear: Wherever there is an affect in 
the dream, it is to be found also in the dream-thoughts; the 
converse, however, is not true. In general, a dream is less rich 
in affects than the psychic material from which it is elaborated. 
When I have reconstructed the dream-thoughts, I see that the 
most intense psychic impulses are constantly striving in them 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


330 

for self-assertion, usually in conflict with others which are 
sharply opposed to them. Now, if I turn back to the dream, I 
often find it colourless and devoid of any very intensive affective 
tone. Not only the content, but also the affective tone of my 
thoughts is often reduced by the dream-work to the level of the 
indifferent. I might say that a suppression of the affects has been 
accomplished by the dream-work. Take, for example, the dream 
of the botanical monograph. It corresponds to a passionate plea 
for my freedom to act as I am acting, to arrange my life as 
seems right to me, and to me alone. The dream which results 
from this sounds indifferent; I have written a monograph; it is 
lying before me; it is provided with coloured plates, and dried 
plants are to be found in each copy. It is like the peace of a 
deserted battlefield; no trace is left of the tumult of battle. 

But things may turn out quite differently; vivid expressions 
of affect may enter into the dream itself; but we will first of all 
consider the unquestioned fact that so many dreams appear in- 
different, whereas it is never possible to go deeply into the dream- 
thoughts without deep emotion. 

The complete theoretical explanation of this suppression of 
affects during the dream-work cannot be given here; it would 
require a most careful investigation of the theory of the affects 
and of the mechanism of repression. Here I can put forward only 
two suggestions. I am forced — for other reasons — to conceive 
the liberation of affects as a centrifugal process directed towards 
the interior of the body, analogous to the processes of motor and 
secretory innervation. Just as in the sleeping state the emission of 
motor impulses towards the outer world seems to be suspended, 
so the centrifugal awakening of affects by unconscious thinking 
during sleep may be rendered more difficult. The affective im- 
pulses which occur during the course of the dream-thoughts may 
thus in themselves be feeble, so that those that find their way 
into the dream are no stronger. According to this line of thought, 
the “suppression of the affects” would not be a consequence of 
the dream-work at all, but a consequence of the state of sleep. 
This may be so, but it cannot possibly be all the truth. We must 
remember that all the more complex dreams have revealed them- 
selves as the result of a compromise between conflicting psychic 



THE DREAM-WORK 


331 

forces. On the one hand, the wish-forming thoughts have to 
oppose the contradiction of a censorship; on the other hand, as 
we have often seen, even in unconscious thinking, every train of 
thought is harnessed to its contradictory counterpart. Since all 
these trains of thought are capable of arousing affects, we shall, 
broadly speaking, hardly go astray if we conceive the suppres- 
sion of affects as the result of the inhibition which the contrasts 
impose upon one another, and the censorship upon the urges 
which it has suppressed. The inhibition of affects would accord- 
ingly be the second consequence of the dream-censorship , just as 
dream-distortion was the first consequence . 

I will here insert an example of a dream in which the indiffer- 
ent emotional tone of the dream-content may be explained by 
the antagonism of the dream-thoughts. I must relate the follow- 
ing short dream, which every reader will read with disgust. 

IV 

Rising ground , and on it something like an open-air latrine; a 
very long bench , at the end of which is a wide aperture. The 
whole of the back edge is thickly covered with little heaps of 
excrement of all sizes and degrees of freshness . A thicket behind 
the bench. I urinate upon the bench ; a long stream of urine 
rinses everything clean , the patches of excrement come off easily 
and fall into the opening. Nevertheless, it seems as though some- 
thing remained at the end. 

Why did I experience no disgust in this dream? 

Because, as the analysis shows, the most pleasant and gratify- 
ing thoughts have co-operated in the formation of this dream. 
Upon analysing it, I immediately think of the Augean stables 
which were cleansed by Hercules. I am this Hercules. The rising 
ground and the thicket belong to Aussee, where my children are 
now staying. I have discovered the infantile etiology of the neu- 
roses, and have thus guarded my own children from falling ill. 
The bench (omitting the aperture, of course) is the faithful copy 
of a piece of furniture of which an affectionate female patient 
has made me a present. This reminds me how my patients honour 
me. Even the museum of human excrement is susceptible of a 
gratifying interpretation. However much it disgusts me, it is a 



332 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

souvenir of the beautiful land of Italy, where in the small cities, 
as everyone knows, the privies are not equipped in any other 
way. The stream of urine that washes everything dean is an 
unmistakable allusion to greatness. It is in this manner that 
Gulliver extinguishes the great fire in Lilliput; to be sure, he 
thereby incurs the displeasure of the tiniest of queens. In this 
way, too, Gargantua, the superman of Master Rabelais, takes 
vengeance upon the Parisians, straddling Notre-Dame and train- 
ing his stream of urine upon the city. Only yesterday I was 
turning over the leaves of Garnier’s illustrations to Rabelais 
before I went to bed. And, strangely enough, here is another 
proof that I am the superman! The platform of Notre-Dame was 
my favourite nook in Paris; every free afternoon I used to go 
up into the towers of the cathedral and there clamber about be- 
tween the monsters and gargoyles. The drcumstance that all the 
excrement vanishes so rapidly before the stream of urine corres- 
ponds to the motto: Afflavit et dissipati sunt, which I shall some 
day make the title of a chapter on the therapeutics of hysteria. 

And now as to the affective occasion of the dream. It had been 
a hot summer afternoon; in the evening, I had given my lecture 
on the connection between hysteria and the perversions, and 
everything which I had to say displeased me thoroughly, and 
seemed utterly valueless. I was tired ; I took not the least pleasure 
in my difficult work, and longed to get away from this rummag- 
ing in human filth; first to see my children, and then to revisit 
the beauties of Italy. In this mood I went from the lecture-hall 
to a cafe to get some little refreshment in the open air, for my 
appetite had forsaken me. But a member of my audience went 
with me; he begged for permission to sit with me while I drank 
my coffee and gulped down my roll, and began to say flattering 
things to me. He told me how much he had learned from me, 
that he now saw everything through different eyes, that I had 
cleansed the Augean stables of error and prejudice, which en- 
cumbered the theory of the neuroses — in short, that I was a very 
great man. My mood was ill-suited to his hymn of praise; I 
struggled with my disgust, and went home earlier in order to get 
rid of him; and before I went to sleep I turned over the leaves of 


THE DREAM-WORK 


333 

Rabelais, and read a short story by C. F. Meyer entitled Die 
Leiden eines Knaben (The Sorrows of a Boy). 

The dream had originated from this material, and Meyer’s 
novel had supplied the recollections of scenes of childhood . 08 
The day’s mood of annoyance and disgust is continued in the 
dream, inasmuch as it is permitted to furnish nearly all the 
material for the dream-content. But during the night the oppo- 
site mood of vigorous, even immoderate self-assertion awakened 
and dissipated the earlier mood. The dream had to assume such 
a form as would accommodate both the expressions of self- 
depreciation and exaggerated self-glorification in the same ma- 
terial. This compromise-formation resulted in an ambiguous 
dream-content, but, owing to the mutual inhibition of the oppo- 
sites, in an indifferent emotional tone. 

According to the theory of wish-fulfilment, this dream would 
not have been possible had not the opposed, and indeed sup- 
pressed, yet pleasure-emphasized megalomaniac train of thought 
been added to the thoughts of disgust. For nothing painful is 
intended to be represented in dreams; the painful elements of 
our daily thoughts are able to force their way into our dreams 
only if at the same time they are able to disguise a wish- 
fulfilment. 

The dream-work is able to dispose of the affects of the dream- 
thoughts in yet another way than by admitting them or reducing 
them to zero. It can transform them into their opposites. We are 
acquainted with the rule that for the purposes of interpretation 
every element of the dream may represent its opposite, as well 
as itself. One can never tell beforehand which is to be posited; 
only the context can decide this point. A suspicion of this state 
of affairs has evidently found its way into the popular conscious- 
ness; the dream-books, in their interpretations, often proceed 
according to the principle of contraries. This transformation into 
the contrary is made possible by the intimate associative ties 
which in our thoughts connect the idea of a thing with that of its 
opposite. Like every other displacement, this serves the purposes 
of the censorship, but it is often the work of wish-fulfilment, for 
98 Cf. the dream about Count Thun, last scene. 



334 THE interpretation oe dreams 

wish-fulfilment consists in nothing more than the substitution of 
an unwelcome thing by its opposite. Just as concrete images 
may be transformed into their contraries in our dreams, so also 
may the affects of the dream-thoughts, and it is probable that 
this inversion of affects is usually brought about by the dream- 
censorship. The suppression and inversion of affects is useful 
even in social life, as is shown by the familiar analogy of the 
dream-censorship and, above all, hypocrisy. If I am conversing 
with a person to whom I must show consideration while I should 
like to address him as an enemy, it is almost more important that 
I should conceal the expression of my affect from him than that 
I should modify the verbal expression of my thoughts. If I ad- 
dress him in courteous terms, but accompany them by looks or 
gestures of hatred and disdain, the effect which I produce upon 
him is not very different from what it would have been had I 
cast my unmitigated contempt into his face. Above all, then, the 
censorship bids me suppress my affects, and if I am a master of 
the art of dissimulation I can hypocritically display the opposite 
affect — smiling where I should like to be angry, and pretending 
affection where I should like to destroy. 

We have already had an excellent example of such an inver- 
sion of affect in the service of the dream-censorship. In the dream 
“of my uncle’s beard” I feel great affection for my friend R. 
while (and because) the dream-thoughts berate him as a simple- 
ton. From this example of the inversion of affects we derived 
our first proof of the existence of the censorship. Even here it is 
not necessary to assume that the dream-work creates a counter- 
affect of this kind that is altogether new; it usually finds it lying 
ready in the material of the dream-thoughts, and merely inten- 
sifies it with the psychic force of the defence-motives until it is 
able to predominate in the dream-formation. In the dream of my 
uncle, the affectionate counter-affect probably has its origin in 
an infantile source (as the continuation of the dream would sug- 
gest), for owing to the peculiar nature of my earliest child- 
hood experiences the relation of uncle and nephew has become 
the source of all my friendships and hatred (cf. analysis on p. 
390). 

An excellent example of such a reversal of affect is found in a 


THE DREAM-WORK 


335 

dream recorded by Ferenczi." “An elderly gentleman was awak- 
ened at night by his wife, who was frightened because he laughed 
so loudly and uncontrollably in his sleep. The man afterwards 
related that he had had the following dream: 1 lay in my bed , a 
gentleman known to me came in, I wanted to turn on the light , 
but I could not ; I attempted to do so repeatedly , but in vain . 
Thereupon my wife got out of bed, in order to help me, but she , 
too, was unable to manage it; being ashamed of her negligS in 
the presence of the gentleman, she finally gave it up and went 
back to her bed; all this was so comical that 1 had to laugh ter- 
ribly. My wife said: ‘What are you laughing at, what are you 
laughing at V but 1 continued to laugh until I woke . The following 
day the man was extremely depressed, and suffered from head- 
ache: 'From too much laughter, which shook me up/ he thought, 

“Analytically considered, the dream looks less comical. In the 
latent dream-thoughts the ‘gentleman known’ to him who came 
into the room is the image of death as the ‘great unknown/ 
which was awakened in his mind on the previous day. The old 
gentleman, who suffers from arteriosclerosis, had good reason to 
think of death on the day before the dream. The uncontrollable 
laughter takes the place of weeping and sobbing at the idea that 
he has to die. It is die light of life that he is no longer able to turn 
on. This mournful thought may have associated itself with a 
failure to effect sexual intercourse, which he had attempted 
shortly before this, and in which the assistance of his wife en 
neglige was of no avail; he realized that he was already on the 
decline. The dream-work knew how to transform the sad idea of 
impotence and death into a comic scene, and the sobbing into 
laughter” 

There is one class of dreams which has a special claim to be 
called “hypocritical,” and which severely tests the theory of 
wish-fulfilment. My attention was called to them when Frau Dr. 
M. Hilferding proposed for discussion by the Psychoanalytic 
Society of Vienna a dream recorded by Rosegger, which is here 
reprinted: — 

In Waldheimat, vol. xi, Rosegger writes as follows in his story, 
Fremd gemacht (p. 303) : — 

09 Internal . Zeitschr. /. Psychoanalyse, iv, 1916. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


336 

“I usually enjoy healthful sleep, yet I have gone without re- 
pose on many a night; in addition to my modest existence as a 
student and literary man, I have for long years dragged out the 
shadow of a veritable tailor’s life — like a ghost from which I 
could not become divorced. 

“It is not true that I have occupied myself very often or very 
intensely with thoughts of my past during the day. A stormer 
of heaven and earth who has escaped from the hide of the Philis- 
tine has other things to think about. And as a gay young fellow, 
I hardly gave a thought to my nocturnal dreams; only later, 
when I had formed the habit of thinking about everything, or 
when the Philistine within me began to assert itself a little, did 
it strike me that — when I dreamed at all — I was always a jour- 
neyman tailor, and that in that capacity I had already worked 
in my master’s shop for a long time without any pay. As I sat 
there beside him, and sewed and pressed, I was perfectly well 
aware that I no longer belonged there, and that as a burgess of 
of the town I had other things to attend to; but I was always on 
a holiday, or away in the country, and so I sat beside my master 
and helped him. I often felt far from comfortable about it, and 
regretted the waste of time which I might have employed for 
better and more useful purposes. If anything was not quite cor- 
rect in measure and cut I had to put up with a scolding from my 
master. Of wages there was never a question. Often, as I sat with 
bent back in the dark workshop, I decided to give notice and 
make myself scarce. Once I actually did so, but the master took 
no notice of me, and next time I was sitting beside him again 
and sewing. 

“How happy I was when I woke up after such weary hours! 
And I then resolved that, if this intrusive dream should ever 
occur again, I would energetically throw it off, and would cry 
aloud: ‘It is only a delusion, I am lying in bed, and I want to 
sleep’ . . . And the next night I would be sitting in the tailor’s 
shop again. 

“So it went on for years, with dismal regularity. Once, when 
the master and I were working at Alpelhofer’s, at the house of 
the peasant with whom I began my apprenticeship, it happened 
that my master was particularly dissatisfied with my work. ‘I 



THE DREAM-WORK 


337 

should like to know where in the world your thoughts are?' he 
cried, and looked at me sullenly. I thought the most sensible 
thing to do would be to get up and explain to the master that I 
was working with him only as a favour, and then take my leave. 
But I did not do this. I even submitted when the master engaged 
an apprentice, and ordered me to make room for him on the 
bench. I moved into the comer, and kept on sewing. On the 
same day another journeyman was engaged; a bigoted fellow; 
he was the Bohemian who had worked for us nineteen years 
earlier, and then had fallen into the lake on his way home from 
the public-house. When he tried to sit down there was no room 
for him. I looked at the master inquiringly, and he said to me: 
£ You have no talent for tailoring; you may go; you're a stranger 
henceforth / My fright on that occasion was so overpowering that 
I woke. 

“The grey of morning glimmered through the clear windows 
of my familiar home. Ob jets d’art surrounded me; in the tasteful 
bookcase stood the eternal Homer, the gigantic Dante, the in- 
comparable Shakespeare, the glorious Goethe — all radiant and 
immortal. From the adjoining room resounded the clear little 
voices of the children, who were waking up prattling to their 
mother. I felt as though I had rediscovered that idyllically sweet, 
peaceful, poetical and spiritualized life in which I have so often 
and so deeply been conscious of contemplative human happiness. 
And yet I was vexed that I had not given my master notice 
first, but had been dismissed by him. 

“And how remarkable this seems to me: since that night, when 
my master ‘made a stranger 1 of me, I have enjoyed restful sleep; 
I no longer dream of my tailoring days, which now lie in the 
remote past; which in their unpretentious simplicity were really 
so cheerful, but which, none the less, have cast a long shadow 
over the later years of my life.” 

In this series of dreams of a poet who, in his younger years, 
had been a journeyman tailor, it is hard to recognize the domina- 
tion of the wish-fulfilment. All the delightful things occurred in 
his waking life, while the dream seemed to drag along with it 
the ghost-like shadow of an unhappy existence which had long 
been forgotten. Dreams of my own of a similar character enable 



338 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

me to give some explanation of such dreams. As a young doctor, 
I worked for a long time in the Chemical Institute without being 
able to accomplish anything in that exacting science, so that in 
the waking state I never think about this unfruitful and actually 
somewhat humiliating period of my student days. On the other 
hand, I have a recurring dream to the effect that I am working 
in the laboratory, making analyses, and experiments, and so 
forth; these dreams, like the examination-dreams, are disagree- 
able, and they are never very distinct. During the analysis of 
one of these dreams my attention was directed to the word “ anal- 
ysis ” which gave me the key to an understanding of them. 
Since then I have become an “analyst.” I make analyses which 
are greatly praised — psychoanalyses, of course. Now I under- 
stand: when I feel proud of these analyses in my waking life, and 
feel inclined to boast of my achievements, my dreams hold up 
to me at night those other, unsuccessful analyses, of which I have 
no reason to be proud; they are the punitive dreams of the up- 
start, like those of the journeyman tailor who became a cele- 
brated poet. But how is it possible for a dream to place itself at 
the service of self-criticism in its conflict with parvenu pride, and 
to take as its content a rational warning instead of a prohibited 
wish-fulfilment? I have already hinted that the answer to this 
question presents many difficulties. We may conclude that the 
foundation of the dream consisted at first of an arrogant phan- 
tasy of ambition; but that in its stead only its suppression and 
abasement has reached the dream-content. One must remember 
that there are masochistic tendencies in mental life to which 
such an inversion might be attributed. I see no objection to re- 
garding such dreams as punishment-dreams , as distinguished 
from wish-fulfilling dreams. I should not see in this any limita- 
tion of the theory of dreams hitherto as presented, but merely a 
verbal concession to the point of view to which the convergence 
of contraries seems strange. But a more thorough investigation 
of individual dreams of this class allows us to recognize yet an- 
other element. In an indistinct, subordinate portion of one of my 
laboratory dreams, I was just at the age which placed me in the 
most gloomy and most unsuccessful year of my professional 



THE DREAM-WORK 


339 

career; I still had no position, and no idea how I was going to 
support myself, when I suddenly found that I had the choice of 
several women whom I might marry! I was, therefore, young 
again and, what is more, she was young again — the woman who 
has shared with me all these difficult years. In this way, one of 
the wishes which constantly gnaws at the heart of the ageing 
man was revealed as the unconscious dream-instigator. The con- 
flict raging in other psychic strata between vanity and self- 
criticism had certainly determined the dream-content, but the 
more deeply-rooted wish for youth had alone made it possible 
as a dream. One often says to oneself even in the waking state: 
“To be sure, things are going well with you to-day, and once 
you found life very hard; but, after all, life was sweet in those 
days, when you were still so young.” 100 

Another group of dreams, which I have often myself experi- 
enced, and which I have recognized to be hypocritical, have as 
their content a reconciliation with persons with whom one has 
long ceased to have friendly relations. The analysis constantly 
discovers an occasion which might well induce me to cast aside 
the last remnants of consideration for these former friends, and 
to treat them as strangers or enemies. But the dream chooses to 
depict the contrary relation. 

In considering dreams recorded by a novelist or poet, we may 
often enough assume that he has excluded from the record those 
details which he felt to be disturbing and regarded as unessential. 
His dreams thus set us a problem which could be readily solved 
if we had an exact reproduction of the dream-content. 

0. Rank has called my attention to the fact that in Grimm’s 
fairy-tale of the valiant little tailor, or Seven at one Stroke, there 
is related a very similar dream of an upstart. The tailor, who has 
become a hero, and has married the king’s daughter, dreams one 
night while lying beside the princess, his wife, about his trade; 
having become suspicious, on the following night she places 

100 Ever since psychoanalysis has dissected the personality into an ego and 
a super-ego ( Group Psychology and the Analysis of the Ego, trans. by 
Janies Strachey, Intern. Psychoanalytic Press, London) it has been easy to 
recognize in these punishment-dreams wish-fulfilments of the super-ego. 



340 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

armed guards where they can listen to what is said by the 
dreamer, and arrest him. But the little tailor is warned, and is 
able to correct his dream. 

The complicated processes of removal, diminution, and in- 
version by which the affects of the dream-thoughts finally be- 
come the affects of the dream may be very well surveyed in 
suitable syntheses of completely analysed dreams. I shall here 
discuss a few examples of affective manifestations in dreams 
which will, I think, prove this conclusively in some of the cases 
cited. 


V 

In the dream about the odd task which the elder Briicke sets me 
— that of preparing my own pelvis — I am aware in the dream 
itself of not feeling appropriate horror . Now this is a wish-fulfil- 
ment in more senses than one. The preparation signifies the self- 
analyses which I perform, as it were, by publishing my book on 
dreams, which I actually found so painful that I postponed the 
printing of the completed manuscript for more than a year. The 
wish now arises that I may disregard this feeling of aversion, and 
for that reason I feel no horror (Grauen, which also means “to 
grow grey”) in the dream. I should much like to escape “Grauen” 
in the other sense too, for I am already growing quite grey, and 
the grey in my hair warns me to delay no longer. For we know 
that at the end of the dream this thought secures representation: 
“I shall have to leave my children to reach the goal of their 
difficult journey without my help.” 

In the two dreams that transfer the expression of satisfaction 
to the moments immediately after waking, this satisfaction is 
in the one case motivated by the expectation that I am now 
going to learn what is meant by “I have already dreamed of this,” 
and refers in reality to the birth of my first child, and in the 
other case it is motivated by the conviction that “that which has 
been announced by a premonitory sign” is now going to happen, 
and the satisfaction is that which I felt on the arrival of my 
second son. Here the same affects that dominated in the dream- 
thoughts have remained in the dream, but the process is prob- 
ably not quite so simple as this in any dream. If the two analyses 


THE DREAM-WORK 


34* 

are examined a little more closely it will be seen that this satis- 
faction, which does not succumb to the censorship, receives re- 
inforcement from a source which must fear the censorship, and 
whose affect would certainly have aroused opposition if it had 
not screened itself by a similar and readily admitted affect of 
satisfaction from the permitted source, and had, so to speak, 
sneaked in behind it. I am unfortunately unable to show this in 
the case of the actual dream, but an example from another situa- 
tion will make my meaning intelligible. I will put the following 
case: Let there be a person near me whom I hate so strongly that 
I have a lively impulse to rejoice should anything happen to him. 
But the moral side of my nature does not give way to this im- 
pulse; I do not dare to express this sinister wish, and when 
something does happen to him which he does not deserve I sup- 
press my satisfaction, and force myself to thoughts and expres- 
sions of regret. Everyone will at some time have found himself 
in such a position. But now let it happen that the hated person, 
through some transgression of his own, draws upon himself a 
well-deserved calamity; I shall now be allowed to give free rein 
to my satisfaction at his being visited by a just punishment, and 
I shall be expressing an opinion which coincides with that of 
other impartial persons. But I observe that my satisfaction 
proves to be more intense than that of others, for it has received 
reinforcement from another source — from my hatred, which was 
hitherto prevented by the inner censorship from furnishing the 
affect, but which, under the altered circumstances, is no longer 
prevented from doing so. This case generally occurs in social 
life when antipathetic persons or the adherents of an unpopular 
minority have been guilty of some offence. Their punishment is 
then usually commensurate not with the guilt, but with their 
guilt plus the ill-will against them that has hitherto not been put 
into effect. Those who punish them doubtless commit an injus- 
tice, but they are prevented from becoming aware of it by the 
satisfaction arising from the release within themselves of a sup- 
pression of long standing. In such cases the quality of the affect 
is justified, but not its degree; and the self-criticism that has 
been appeased in respect of the first point is only too ready to 
neglect to scrutinize the second point. Once you have opened 



342 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

the doors more people enter than it was your original intention 
to admit. 

A striking feature of the neurotic character, namely, that in 
it causes capable of evoking affect produce results which are 
qualitatively justified but quantitatively excessive, is to be ex- 
plained on these lines, in so far as it admits of a psychological 
explanation at all. But the excess of affect proceeds from un- 
conscious and hitherto suppressed affective sources which are 
able to establish an associative connection with the actual occa- 
sion, and for whose liberation of affect the unprotested and per- 
mitted source of affects opens up the desired path. Our attention 
is thus called to the fact that the relation of mutual inhibition 
must not be regarded as the only relation obtaining between the 
suppressed and the suppressing psychic institution. The cases in 
which the two institutions bring about a pathological result by 
co-operation and mutual reinforcement deserve just as much at- 
tention. These hints regarding the psychic mechanism will con- 
tribute to our understanding of the expressions of affects in 
dreams. A gratification which makes its appearance in a dream, 
and which, of course, may readily be found in its proper place 
in the dream-thoughts, may not always be fully explained by 
means of this reference. As a rule, it is necessary to search for a 
second source in the dream-thoughts, upon which the pressure of 
the censorship rests, and which, under this pressure, would have 
yielded not gratification but the contrary affect, had it not been 
enabled by the presence of the first dream-source to free its 
gratification-affect from repression, and reinforce the gratifica- 
tion springing from the other source. Hence affects which appear 
in dreams appear to be formed by the confluence of several 
tributaries, and are over-determined in respect of the material 
of the dream-thoughts. Sources of affect which are able to furnish 
the same affect combine in the dream-work in order to pro- 
duce it . 101 

Some insight into these involved relations is gained from the 
analysis of the admirable dream in which “non vixit” consti- 
tutes the central point (cf. p. 287). In this dream expressions of 

101 1 have since explained the extraordinary effect of pleasure produced by 
tendency wit on analogous lines. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


343 

affect of different qualities are concentrated at two points in the 
manifest content. Hostile and painful impulses (in the dream 
itself we have the phrase “overcome by strange emotions”) over- 
lap one another at the point where I destroy my antagonistic 
friend with a couple of words. At the end of the dream I am 
greatly pleased, and am quite ready to believe in a possibility 
which I recognize as absurd when I am awake, namely, that 
there are revenants who can be swept away by a mere wish. 

I have not yet mentioned the occasion of this dream. It is an 
important one, and leads us far down into the meaning of the 
dream. From my friend in Berlin (whom I have designed as FI.) 
I had received the news that he was about to undergo an opera- 
tion, and that relatives of his living in Vienna would inform me 
as to his condition. The first few messages after the operation 
were not very reassuring, and caused me great anxiety. I should 
have liked to go to him myself, but at that time I was afflicted 
with a painful complaint which made every movement a tor- 
ment. I now learn from the dream-thoughts that I feared for this 
dear friend’s life. I knew that his only sister, with whom I had 
never been acquainted, had died young, after a very brief illness. 
(In the dream FI. tells me about his sister , and says: “In three- 
quarters of an hour she was dead.”) I must have imagined that 
his own constitution was not much stronger, and that I should 
soon be travelling, in spite of my health, in response to far 
worse news — and that I should arrive too late, for which I should 
eternally reproach myself . 103 This reproach, that I should arrive 
too late, has become the central point of the dream, but it has 
been represented in a scene in which the revered teacher of my 
student years — Briicke — reproaches me for the same thing writh 
a terrible look from his blue eyes. What brought about this alter- 
ation of the scene will soon become apparent: the dream cannot 
reproduce the scene itself as I experienced it. To be sure, it 
leaves the blue eyes to the other man, but it gives me the part 
of the annihilator, an inversion which is obviously the work of 

102 It is this fancy from the unconscious dream-thoughts which pre- 
emptorily demands non vivit instead of non vixit. “You have come too 
late, he is no longer alive.” The fact that the manifest situation of the 
dream aims at the non vivit has been mentioned on page 288. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


344 

the wish-fulfilment. My concern for the life of my friend, my 
self-reproach for not having gone to him, my shame (he had 
come to me in Vienna unobtrusively ), my desire to consider 
myself excused on account of my illness — all this builds up an 
emotional tempest which is distinctly felt in my sleep, and 
which rages in that region of the dream-thoughts. 

But there was another thing in the occasion of the dream 
which had quite the opposite effect. With the unfavourable news 
during the first days of the operation I received also an injunc- 
tion to speak to no one about the whole affair, which hurt my 
feelings, for it betrayed an unnecessary distrust of my discre- 
tion. I know, of course, that this request did not proceed from 
my friend, but that it was due to clumsiness or excessive timid- 
ity on the part of the messenger; yet the concealed reproach 
affected me very disagreeably, because it was not altogether un- 
justified. As we know, only reproaches which “have something 
in them” have the power to hurt. Years ago, when I was younger 
than I am now, I knew two men who were friends, and who 
honoured me with their friendship; and I quite superfluously 
told one of them what the other had said of him. This incident, 
of course, had nothing to do with the affairs of my friend FI., 
but I have never forgotten the reproaches to which I had to 
listen on that occasion. One of the two friends between whom 
I made trouble was Professor Fleischl; the other one I will call 
by his baptismal name, Josef, a name which was borne also by 
my friend and antagonist P., who appears in this dream. 

In the dream the element unobtrusively points to the reproach 
that I cannot keep anything to myself, and so does the question 
of FI. as to how much of his affairs I have told P . But it is the 
intervention of that old memory which transposes the reproach 
for arriving too late from the present to the time when I was 
working in Brucke’s laboratory; and by replacing the second 
person in the annihilation scene of the dream by a Josef, I enable 
this scene to represent not only the first reproach — that I have 
arrived too late — but also that other reproach, more strongly 
affected by the repression, to the effect that I do not keep secrets. 
The work of condensation and displacement in this dream, as 
well as the motives for it, are now obvious. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


345 

My present trivial annoyance at the injunction not to divulge 
secrets draws reinforcement from springs that flow far beneath 
the surface, and so swells to a stream of hostile impulses towards 
persons who are in reality dear to me. The source which fur- 
nishes the reinforcement is to be found in my childhood. I have 
already said that my warm friendships as well as my enmities 
with persons of my own age go back to my childish relations to 
my nephew, who was a year older than I. In these he had the 
upper hand, and I early learned how to defend myself; we lived 
together, were inseparable, and loved one another, but at times, 
as the statements of older persons testify, we used to squabble 
and accuse one another. In a certain sense, all my friends are 
incarnations of this first figure; they are all revenants. My 
nephew himself returned when a young man, and then we were 
like Caesar and Brutus. An intimate friend and a hated enemy 
have always been indispensable to my emotional life; I have 
always been able to create them anew, and not infrequently my 
childish ideal has been so closely approached that friend and 
enemy have coincided in the same person; but not simultane- 
ously, of course, nor in constant alternation, as was the case in 
my early childhood. 

How, when such associations exist, a recent occasion of emo- 
tion may cast back to the infantile occasion and substitute this 
as a cause of affect, I shall not consider now. Such an investiga- 
tion would properly belong to the psychology of unconscious 
thought, or a psychological explanation of the neuroses. Let us 
assume, for the purposes of dream-interpretation, that a childish 
recollection presents itself, or is created by the phantasy with, 
more or less, the following content: We two children quarrel on 
account of some object — just what we shall leave undecided, 
although the memory, or illusion of memory, has a very definite 
object in view — and each claims that he got there first , and 
therefore has the first right to it. We come to blows; Might 
comes before Right; and, according to the indications of the 
dream, I must have known that I was in the wrong ( noticing the 
error myself ) ; but this time I am the stronger, and take posses- 
sion of the battlefield; the defeated combatant hurries to my 
father, his grandfather, and accuses me, and I defend myself 



346 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

with the words, which I have heard from my father: “I hit him 
because he hit me 99 Thus, this recollection, or more probably 
phantasy, which forces itself upon my attention in the course of 
the analysis — without further evidence I myself do not know 
how — becomes a central item of the dream-thoughts, which col- 
lects the affective impulses prevailing in the dream-thoughts, as 
the bowl of a fountain collects the water that flows into it. From 
this point the dream-thoughts flow along the following channels: 
“It serves you right that you have had to make way for me; why 
did you try to push me off? I don’t need you; HI soon find 
someone else to play with,” etc. Then the channels are opened 
through which these thoughts flow back again into the dream- 
representation. For such an “ote-toi que je m’y mette 9 9 I once 
had to reproach my deceased friend Josef. He was next to me in 
the line of promotion in Briicke’s laboratory, but advancement 
there was very slow. Neither of the two assistants budged from 
his place, and youth became impatient. My friend, who knew 
that his days were numbered, and was bound by no intimate re- 
lation to his superior, sometimes gave free expression to his 
impatience. As this superior was a man seriously ill, the wish to 
see him removed by promotion was susceptible of an obnoxious 
secondary interpretation. Several years earlier, to be sure, I 
myself had cherished, even more intensely, the same wish — to 
obtain a post which had fallen vacant; wherever there are grada- 
tions of rank and promotion the way is opened for the suppres- 
sion of covetous wishes. Shakespeare’s Prince Hal cannot rid 
himself of the temptation to see how the crown fits, even at the 
bedside of his sick father. But, as may readily be understood, 
the dream inflicts this inconsiderate wish not upon me, but upon 
my friend . 103 

“As he was ambitious, I slew him.” As he could not expect 
that the other man would make way for him, the man himself 
has been put out of the way. I harbour these thoughts immedi- 
ately after attending the unveiling of the memorial to the other 

103 It will have been obvious that the name Josef plays a great part in my 
dreams (see the dream about my unde) . It is particularly easy for me to 
hide my ego in my dreams behind persons of this name, since Joseph was 
the name of the dream-interpreter in the Bible. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


347 

man at the University. Part of the satisfaction which I feel in 
the dream may therefore be interpreted: A just punishment; it 
serves you right. 

At the funeral of this friend a young man made the following 
remark, which seemed rather out of place: “The preacher talked 
as though the world could no longer exist without this one 
human being.” Here was a stirring of revolt in the heart of a 
sincere man, whose grief had been disturbed by exaggeration. 
But with this speech are connected the dr earn- thoughts: “No 
one is really irreplaceable; how many men have I already es- 
corted to the grave! But I am still alive; I have survived them 
all; I claim the field.” Such a thought, at the moment when I 
fear that if I make a journey to see him I shall find my friend 
no longer among the living, permits only of the further develop- 
ment that I am glad once more to have survived someone; that 
it is not I who have died but he; that I am master of the field, 
as once I was in the imagined scene of my childhood. This satis- 
faction, infantile in origin, at the fact that I am master of the 
field, covers the greater part of the affect which appears in the 
dream. I am glad that I am the survivor; I express this senti- 
ment with the naive egoism of the husband who says to his wife: 
“If one of us dies, I shall move to Paris.” My expectation takes 
it as a matter of course that I am not the one to die. 

It cannot be denied that great self-control is needed to inter- 
pret one’s dreams and to report them. One has to reveal oneself 
as the sole villain among all the noble souls with whom one 
shares the breath of life. Thus, I find it quite comprehensible 
that remnants should exist only as long as one wants them, and 
that they can be obliterated by a wish. It was for this reason 
that my friend Josef was punished. But the revenants are the 
successive incarnations of the friend of my childhood; I am also 
gratified at having replaced this person for myself over and over 
again, and a substitute will doubtless soon be found even for 
the friend whom I am now on the point of losing. No one is 
irreplaceable. 

But what has the dream-censorship been doing in the mean- 
time? Why does it not raise the most emphatic objection to a 
train of thoughts characterized by such brutal selfishness, and 



348 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

transform the satisfaction inherent therein into extreme dis- 
comfort? I think it is because other unobjectionable trains of 
thought referring to the same persons result also in satisfaction, 
and with their affect cover that proceeding from the forbidden 
infantile sources. In another stratum of thought I said to myself, 
at the ceremony of unveiling the memorial: “I have lost so 
many dear friends, some through death, some through the dis- 
solution of friendship; is it not good that substitutes have pre- 
sented themselves, that I have gained a friend who means more 
to me than the others could, and whom I shall now always re- 
tain, at an age when it is not easy to form new friendships?” 
The gratification of having found this substitute for my lost 
friend can be. taken over into the dream without interference, 
but behind it there sneaks in the hostile feeling of malicious 
gratification from the infantile source. Childish affection un- 
doubtedly helps to reinforce the rational affection of to-day; but 
childish hatred also has found its way into the representation. 

But besides this, there is in the dream a distinct reference to 
another train of thoughts which may result in gratification. 
Some time before this, after long waiting, a little daughter was 
bom to my friend. I knew how he had grieved for the sister 
whom he had lost at an early age, and I wrote to him that I felt 
that he would transfer to this child the love he had felt for her, 
that this little girl would at last make him forget his irreparable 
loss. 

Thus this train also connects up with the intermediary 
thoughts of the latent dream-content, from which paths radiate 
in the most contrary directions: “No one is irreplaceable. See, 
here are only revenants; all those whom one has lost return.” 
And now the bonds of association between the contradictory 
components of the dream-thoughts are more tightly drawn by 
the accidental circumstance that my friend’s little daughter 
bears the same name as the girl playmate of my own youth, who 
was just my own age, and the sister of my oldest friend and 
antagonist. I heard the name “Pauline” with satisfaction , and 
in order to allude to this coincidence I replaced one Josef in the 
dream by another Josef, and found it impossible to suppress the 
identical initials in the name Fleischl and FI. From this point a 


THE DREAM- WORK 


349 


train of thought runs to the naming of my own children. I in- 
sisted that the names should not be chosen according to the 
fashion of the day, but should be determined by regard for the 
memory of those dear to us. The children’s names make them 
“revenants” And, finally, is not the procreation of children for 
all men the only way of access to immortality? 

I shall add only a few observations as to the affects of dreams 
considered from another point of view. In the psyche of the 
sleeper an affective tendency — what we call a mood — may be 
contained as its dominating element, and may induce a corres- 
ponding mood in the dream. This mood may be the result of the 
experiences and thoughts of the day, or it may be of somatic 
origin; in either case it will be accompanied by the correspond- 
ing trains of thought. That this ideational content of the dream- 
thoughts should at one time determine the affective tendency 
primarily, while at another time it is awakened in a secondary 
manner by the somatically determined emotional disposition, is 
indifferent for the purposes of dream-formation. This is always 
subject to the restriction that it can represent only a wish-fulfil- 
ment, and that it may lend its psychic energy to the wish alone. 
The mood actually present will receive the same treatment as 
the sensation which actually emerges during sleep (cf. p. 135), 
which is either neglected or reinterpreted in the sense of a wish- 
fulfilment. Painful moods during sleep become the motive force 
of the dream, inasmuch as they awake energetic wishes which 
the dream has to fulfil. The material in which they inhere is 
elaborated until it is serviceable for the expression of the wish- 
fulfilment. The more intense and the more dominating the ele- 
ment of the painful mood in the dream-thoughts, the more surely 
will the most strongly suppressed wish-impulses take advantage 
of the opportunity to secure representation; for thanks to the 
actual existence of discomfort, which otherwise they would have 
to create spontaneously, they find that the more difficult part of 
the work necessary to ensure representation has already been 
accomplished; and with these observations we touch once more 
upon the problem of anxiety-dreams, which will prove to be the 
boundary-case of dream-activity. 



350 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


I. THE SECONDARY ELABORATION 

We will at last turn our attention to the fourth of the factors 
participating in dream-formation. 

If we continue our investigation of the dream-content on the 
lines already laid down — that is, by examining the origin in the 
dream-thoughts of conspicuous occurrences — we come upon ele- 
ments that can be explained only by making an entirely new 
assumption. I have in mind cases where one manifests astonish- 
ment, anger, or resistance in a dream, and that, too, in respect of 
part of the dream-content itself. Most of these impulses of 
criticism in dreams are not directed against the dream-content, 
but prove to be part of the dream-material, taken over and fit- 
tingly applied, as I have already shown by suitable examples. 
There are, however, criticisms of this sort which are not so 
derived: their correlatives cannot be found in the dream-ma- 
terial. What, for instance, is meant by the criticism not infre- 
quent in dreams: “After all, it's only a dream”? This is a 
genuine criticism of the dream, such as I might make if I were 
awake. Not infrequently it is only the prelude to waking; even 
oftener it is preceded by a painful feeling, which subsides when 
the actuality of the dream-state has been affirmed. The thought: 
“After all, it's only a dream” in the dream itself has the same 
intention as it has on the stage on the lips of Offenbach’s Belle 
H6lbie; it seeks to minimize what has just been experienced, and 
to secure indulgence for what is to follow. It serves to lull to 
sleep a certain mental agency which at the given moment has 
every occasion to rouse itself and forbid the continuation of the 
dream, or the scene. But it is more convenient to go on sleeping 
and to tolerate the dream, “because, after all, it’s only a dream.” 
I imagine that the disparaging criticism: “After all, it’s only a 
dream,” appears in the dream at the moment when the censor- 
ship, which is never quite asleep, feels that it has been surprised 
by the already admitted dream. It is too late to suppress the 
dream, and the agency therefore meets with this remark the 
anxiety or painful emotion which rises into the dream. It is an 
expression of the esprit d’escalier on the part of the psychic 
censorship. 


THE DREAM-WORK 


351 

In this example we have incontestable proof that everything 
which the dream contains does not come from the dream- 
thoughts, but that a psychic function, which cannot be differ- 
entiated from our waking thoughts, may make contributions to 
the dream-content. The question arises, does this occur only in 
exceptional cases, or does the psychic agency which is otherwise 
active only as the censorship play a constant part in dream- 
formation? 

One must decide unhesitatingly for the latter view. It is in- 
disputable that the censoring agency, whose influence we have 
so far recognized only in the restrictions of and omissions in the 
dream-content, is likewise responsible for interpolations in and 
amplifications of this content. Often these interpolations are 
readily recognized; they are introduced with hesitation, pref- 
aced by an “as if” ; they have no special vitality of their own, and 
are constantly inserted at points where they may serve to con- 
nect two portions of the dream-content or create a continuity 
between two sections of the dream. They manifest less ability to 
adhere in the memory than do the genuine products of the dream- 
material; if the dream is forgotten, they are forgotten first, and 
I strongly suspect that our frequent complaint that although 
we have dreamed so much we have forgotten most of the dream, 
and have remembered only fragments, is explained by the im- 
mediate falling away of just these cementing thoughts. In a 
complete analysis these interpolations are often betrayed by the 
fact that no material is to be found for them in the dream- 
thoughts. But after careful examination I must describe this 
case as the less usual one; in most cases the interpolated thoughts 
can be traced to material in the dream-thoughts which can claim 
a place in the dream neither by its own merits nor by way of 
over-determination. Only in the most extreme cases does the 
psychic function in dream-formation which we are now consid- 
ering rise to original creation; whenever possible it makes use 
of anything appropriate that it can find in the dream-material. 

What distinguishes this part of the dream-work, and also 
betrays it, is its tendency. This function proceeds in a manner 
which the poet maliciously attributes to the philosopher: with 
its rags and tatters it stops up the breaches in the structure of the 



352 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

dream. The result of its efforts is that the dream loses the appear- 
ance of absurdity and incoherence, and approaches the pattern 
of an intelligible experience. But the effort is not always crowned 
with complete success. Thus, dreams occur which may, upon 
superficial examination, seem faultlessly logical and correct; 
they start from a possible situation, continue it by means of 
consistent changes, and bring it — although this is rare — to a not 
unnatural conclusion. These dreams have been subjected to the 
most searching elaboration by a psychic function similar to our 
waking thought; they seem to have a meaning, but this meaning 
is very far removed from the real meaning of the dream. If we 
analyse them, we are convinced that the secondary elaboration 
has handled the material with the greatest freedom, and has 
retained as little as possible of its proper relations. These are the 
dreams which have, so to speak, already been once interpreted 
before we subject them to waking interpretation. In other 
dreams this tendencious elaboration has succeeded only up to a 
point; up to this point consistency seems to prevail, but then 
the dream becomes nonsensical or confused; but perhaps before 
it concludes it may once more rise to a semblance of rationality. 
In yet other dreams the elaboration has failed completely; we 
find ourselves helpless, confronted with a senseless mass of 
fragmentary contents. 

I do not wish to deny to this fourth dream-forming power, 
which will soon become familiar to us — it is in reality the only 
one of the four dream-creating factors which is familiar to us in 
other connections — I do not wish to deny to this fourth factor 
the faculty of creatively making new contributions to our 
dreams. But its influence is certainly exerted, like that of the 
other factors, mainly in the preference and selection of psychic 
material already formed in the dream-thoughts. Now there is a 
case where it is to a great extent spared the work of building, as 
it were, a facade to the dream by the fact that such a structure, 
only waiting to be used, already exists in the material of the 
dream- thoughts. I am accustomed to describe the element of the 
dream-thoughts which I have in mind as “phantasy”; I shall 
perhaps avoid misunderstanding if I at once point to the day - 



THE DREAM-WORK. 


353 

dream as an analogy in waking life . 104 The part played by this 
element in our psychic life has not yet been fully recognized and 
revealed by psychiatrists; though M. Benedikt has, it seems to 
me, made a highly promising beginning. Yet the significance of 
the day-dream has not escaped the unerring insight of the poets; 
we are all familiar with the description of the day-dreams of one 
of his subordinate characters which Alphonse Daudet has given 
us in his Nabab . The study of the psychoneuroses discloses the 
astonishing fact that these phantasies or day-dreams are the 
immediate predecessors of symptoms of hysteria — at least, of a 
great many of them; for hysterical symptoms are dependent not 
upon actual memories, but upon the phantasies built up on a 
basis of memories. The frequent occurrence of conscious day- 
phantasies brings these formations to our ken; but while some 
of these phantasies are conscious, there is a superabundance of 
unconscious phantasies, which must perforce remain unconscious 
on account of their content and their origin in repressed ma- 
terial. A more thorough examination of the character of these 
day-phantasies shows with what good reason the same name 
has been given to these formations as to the products of noc- 
turnal thought — dreams . They have essential features in com- 
mon with nocturnal dreams; indeed, the investigation of day- 
dreams might really have afforded the shortest and best approach 
to the understanding of nocturnal dreams. 

Like dreams, they are wish-fulfilments; like dreams, they are 
largely based upon the impressions of childish experiences; like 
dreams, they obtain a certain indulgence from the censorship in 
respect of their creations. If we trace their formation, we become 
aware how the wish-motive which has been operative in their 
production has taken the material of which they are built, mixed 
it together, rearranged it, and fitted it together into a new 
whole. They bear very much the same relation to the childish 
memories to which they refer as many of the baroque palaces of 
Rome bear to the ancient ruins, whose hewn stones and columns 
have furnished the material for the structures built in the mod- 
ern style. 

104 Reve, petit roman = day-dream, story. 



354 the interpretation of dreams 

In the “secondary elaboration” of the dream-content which 
we have ascribed to our fourth dream-forming factor, we find 
once more the very same activity which is allowed to manifest 
itself, uninhibited by other influences, in the creation of day- 
dreams. We may say, without further preliminaries, that this 
fourth factor of ours seeks to construct something like a day- 
dream from the material which offers itself. But where such a 
day-dream has already been constructed in the context of the 
dream-thoughts, this factor of the dream-work will prefer to 
take possession of it, and contrive that it gets into the dream- 
content. There are dreams that consist merely of the repetition 
of a day-phantasy, which has perhaps remained unconscious — 
as, for instance, the boy’s dream that he is riding in a war-chariot 
with the heroes of the Trojan war. In my “Autodidasker” dream 
the second part of the dream at least is the faithful repetition of 
a day-phantasy — harmless in itself — of my dealings with Pro- 
fessor N. The fact that the exciting phantasy forms only a part 
of the dream, or that only a part of it finds its way into the 
dream-content, is due to the complexity of the conditions which 
the dream must satisfy at its genesis. On the whole, the phantasy 
is treated like any other component of the latent material; but 
it is often still recognizable as a whole in the dream. In my 
dreams there are often parts which are brought into prominence 
by their producing a different impression from that produced by 
the other parts. They seem to me to be in a state of flux, to be 
more coherent and at the same time more transient than other 
portions of the same dream. I know that these are unconscious 
phantasies which find their way into the context of the dream, 
but I have never yet succeeded in registering such a phantasy. 
For the rest, these phantasies, like all the other component 
parts of the dream-thoughts, are jumbled together, condensed, 
superimposed, and so on; but we find all the transitional stages, 
from the case in which they may constitute the dream-content, 
or at least the dream-fagade, unaltered, to the most contrary 
case, in which they are represented in the dream-content by 
only one of their elements, or by a remote allusion to such an 
element. The fate of the phantasies in the dream-thoughts is 
obviously determined by the advantages they can offer as 



THE DREAM- WORK 355 

against the claims of the censorship and the pressure of con* 
densation. 

In my choice of examples for dream-interpretation I have ; as 
far as possible, avoided those dreams in which unconscious 
phantasies play a considerable part, because the introduction 
of this psychic element would have necessitated an extensive 
discussion of the psychology of unconscious thought. But even 
in this connection I cannot entirely avoid the “phantasy,” be- 
cause it often finds its way into the dream complete, and still 
more often perceptibly glimmers through it. I might mention 
yet one more dream, which seems to be composed of two distinct 
and opposed phantasies, overlapping here and there, of which 
the first is superficial, while the second becomes, as it were, the 
interpretation of the first . 105 

The dream — it is the only one of which I possess no careful 
notes — is roughly to this effect: The dreamer — a young unmar- 
ried man — is sitting in his favourite inn , which is seen correctly; 
several persons come to fetch him , among them someone who 
wants to arrest him. He says to his table companions , “ I will pay 
later, I am coming back ” But they cry , smiling scornfully: “We 
know all about that; that 9 s what everybody says ” One guest 
calls after him: “ There goes another one ” He is then led to a 
small place where he finds a woman with a child in her arms. One 
of his escorts says: “This is Herr Muller ” A commissioner or 
some other official is running through a bundle of tickets or 
papers, repeating Muller, Muller, Muller. At last the commis- 
sioner asks him a question, which he answers with a “Yes” He 
then takes a look at the woman, and notices that she has grown a 
large beard . 

The two component parts are here easily separable. What is 
105 1 have analysed an excellent example of a dream of this kind, having 
its origin in the stratification of several phantasies, in the Fragment of an 
Analysis of a Case of Hysteria ( Collected Papers , vol. iii). I undervalued 
the significance of such phantasies for dream-formation as long as I was 
working principally on my own dreams, which were rarely based upon day- 
dreams but most frequently upon discussions and mental conflicts. With 
other persons it is often much easier to prove the complete analogy between 
the nocturnal dream and the day-dream. In hysterical patients an attack 
may often be replaced by a dream; it is then obvious that the day-dream 
phantasy is the first step for both these psychic formations. 



356 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

superficial is the phantasy of being arrested ; this seems to be 
newly created by the dream-work. But behind it the phantasy of 
marriage is visible, and this material, on the other hand, has been 
slightly modified by the dream-work, and the features which 
may be common to the two phantasies appear with special dis- 
tinctness, as in Galton’s composite photographs. The promise of 
the young man, who is at present a bachelor, to return to his 
place at his accustomed table — the scepticism of his drinking 
companions, made wise by their many experiences — their calling 
after him: “There goes (marries) another one 5 ' — are all fea- 
tures easily susceptible of the other interpretation, as is the 
affirmative answer given to the official. Running through a 
bundle of papers and repeating the same name corresponds to a 
subordinate but easily recognized feature of the marriage cere- 
mony — the reading aloud of the congratulatory telegrams which 
have arrived at irregular intervals, and which, of course, are all 
addessed to the same name. In the personal appearance of the 
bride in this dream the marriage phantasy has even got the bet- 
ter of the arrest phantasy which screens it. The fact that this 
bride finally wears a beard I can explain from information re- 
ceived — I had no opportunity of making an analysis. The 
dreamer had, on the previous day, been crossing the street with 
a friend who was just as hostile to marriage as himself, and had 
called his friend’s attention to a beautiful brunette who was 
coming towards them. The friend had remarked: “Yes, if only 
these women wouldn’t get beards as they grow older, like their 
fathers.” 

Of course, even in this dream there is no lack of elements 
with which the dream-distortion has done deep work. Thus, the 
speech, “I will pay later,” may have reference to the behaviour 
feared on the part of the father-in-law in the matter of a dowry. 
Obviously all sorts of misgivings are preventing the dreamer 
from surrendering himself with pleasure to the phantasy of mar- 
riage. One of these misgivings — that with marriage he might 
lose his freedom — has embodied itself in the transformation of 
a scene of arrest. 

If we once more return to the thesis that the dream-work 
prefers to make use of a ready-made phantasy, instead of first 



THE DREAM- WORK 


357 

creating one from the material of the dream-thoughts, we shall 
perhaps be able to solve one of the most interesting problems of 
the dream. I have related the dream of Maury, who is struck on 
the back of the neck by a small board, and wakes after a long 
dream — a complete romance of the period of the French Revolu- 
tion. Since the dream is produced in a coherent form, and com- 
pletely fits the explanation of the waking stimulus, of whose 
occurrence the sleeper could have had no foreboding, only one 
assumption seems possible, namely, that the whole richly elab- 
orated dream must have been composed and dreamed in the 
short interval of time between the falling of the board on 
Maury’s cervical vertebrae and the waking induced by the blow. 
We should not venture to ascribe such rapidity to the mental 
operations of the waking state, so that we have to admit that 
the dream-work has the privilege of a remarkable acceleration 
of its issue. 

To this conclusion, which rapidly became popular, more re- 
cent authors (Le Lorrain, Egger, and others) have opposed 
emphatic objections; some of them doubt the correctness of 
Maury’s record of the dream, some seek to show that the rapidity 
of our mental operations in waking life is by no means inferior 
to that which we can, without reservation, ascribe to the mental 
operations in dreams. The discussion raises fundamental ques- 
tions, which I do not think are at all near solution. But I must 
confess that Egger ’s objections, for example, to Maury’s dream 
of the guillotine, do not impress me as convincing. I would 
suggest the following explanation of this dream: Is it so very im- 
probable that Maury’s dream may have represented a phantasy 
which had been preserved for years in his memory, in a completed 
state, and which was awakened — I should like to say, alluded 
to — at the moment when he became aware of the waking stim- 
ulus? The whole difficulty of composing so long a story, with all 
its details, in the exceedingly short space of time which is here 
at the dreamer’s disposal then disappears; the story was already 
composed. If the board had struck Maury’s neck when he was 
awake, there would perhaps have been time for the thought: 
“Why, that’s just like being guillotined.” But as he is struck by 
the board while asleep, the dream-work quickly utilizes the in- 



35S the interpretation of dreams 

coming stimulus for the construction of a wish-fulfilment, as if 
it thought (this is to be taken quite figuratively): “Here is a 
good opportunity to realize the wish-phantasy which I formed 
at such and such a time while I was reading.” It seems to me 
undeniable that this dream-romance is just such a one as a young 
man is wont to construct under the influence of exciting impres- 
sions. Who has not been fascinated — above all, a Frenchman and 
a student of the history of civilization — by descriptions of the 
Reign of Terror, in which the aristocracy, men and women, the 
flower of the nation, showed that it was possible to die with a 
light heart, and preserved their ready wit and the refinement of 
their manners up to the moment of the last fateful summons? 
How tempting to fancy oneself in the midst of all this, as one 
of these young men who take leave of their ladies with a kiss of 
the hand, and fearlessly ascend the scaffold! Or perhaps ambi- 
tion was the ruling motive of the phantasy — the ambition to 
put oneself in the place of one of those powerful personalities 
who, by their sheer force of intellect and their fiery eloquence, 
ruled the city in which the heart of mankind was then beating 
so convulsively; who were impelled by their convictions to send 
thousands of human beings to their death, and were paving the 
way for the transformation of Europe; who, in the meantime, 
were not sure of their own heads, and might one day lay them 
under the knife of the guillotine, perhaps in the role of a Giron- 
dist or the hero Danton? The detail preserved in the memory of 
the dream, “accompanied by an enormous crowd,” seems to show 
that Maury’s phantasy was an ambitious one of just this char- 
acter. 

But the phantasy prepared so long ago need not be experi- 
enced again in sleep; it is enough that it should be, so to speak, 
“touched off.” What I mean is this: If a few notes are struck, 
and someone says, as in Don Juan: “That is from Figaro's Wed- 
ding by Mozart,” memories sudenly surge up within me, none 
of which I can recall to consciousness a moment later. The phrase 
serves as a point of irruption from which a complete whole is 
simultaneously put into a condition of stimulation. It may well 
be the same in unconscious thinking. Through the waking stim- 
ulus the psychic station is excited which gives access to the 


THE DREAM-WORK. 


359 

whole guillotine phantasy. This phantasy, however, is not run 
through in sleep, but only in the memory of the awakened 
sleeper. Upon waking, the sleeper remembers in detail the phan- 
tasy which was transferred as a whole into the dream. At the 
same time, he has no means of assuring himself that he is really 
remembering something which was dreamed. The same explana- 
tion — namely, that one is dealing with finished phantasies which 
have been evoked as wholes by the waking stimulus — may be 
applied to other dreams which are adapted to the waking stimu- 
lus — for example, to Napoleon’s dream of a battle before the 
explosion of a bomb. Among the dreams collected by Justine 
Tobowolska in her dissertation on the apparent duration of time 
in dreams, 106 I think the most corroborative is that related by 
Macario (1857) as having been dreamed by a playwright, Casi- 
mir Bonjour. Bonjour intended one evening to witness the first 
performance of one of his own plays, but he was so tired that 
he dozed off in his chair behind the scenes just as the curtain was 
rising. In his sleep he went through all the five acts of his play, 
and observed all the various signs of emotion which were mani- 
fested by the audience during each individual scene. At the dose 
of the performance, to his great satisfaction, he heard his name 
called out amidst the most lively manifestations of applause. 
Suddenly he woke. He could hardly believe either his eyes or 
his ears; the performance had not gone beyond the first lines of 
the first scene; he could not have been asleep for more than two 
minutes. As for the dream, the running through the five acts of 
the play and the observing the attitude of the public towards 
each individual scene need not, we may venture to assert, have 
been something new, produced while the dreamer was asleep; it 
may have been a repetition of an already completed work of 
the phantasy. Tobowolska and other authors have emphasized 
a common characteristic of dreams that show an accelerated 
flow of ideas: namely, that they seem to be especially coherent, 
and not at all like other dreams, and that the dreamer’s memory 
of them is summary rather than detailed. But these are precisely 
the characteristics which would necessarily be exhibited by 
106 Tobowolska, Justine. Made sur les illusions de temps dans les reves du 
sommeil normal , 1900, p. 5$. 



360 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

ready-made phantasies touched off by the dream-work — a con- 
clusion which is not, of course, drawn by these authors. I do not 
mean to assert that all dreams due to a waking stimulus admit 
of this explanation, or that the problem of the accelerated flux 
of ideas in dreams is entirely disposed of in this manner. 

And here we are forced to consider the relation of this sec- 
ondary elaboration of the dream-content to the other factors of 
the dream-work. May not the procedure perhaps be as follows? 
The dream-forming factors, the efforts at condensation, the 
necessity of evading the censorship, and the regard for repre- 
sentability by the psychic means of the dream first of all create 
from the dream-material a provisional dream-content, which is 
subsequently modified until it satisfies as far as possible the 
exactions of a secondary agency. — No, this is hardly probable. 
We must rather assume that the requirements of this agency 
constitute from the very first one of the conditions which the 
dream must satisfy, and that this condition, as well as the con- 
ditions of condensation, the opposing censorship, and represent- 
ability, simultaneously influence, in an inductive and selective 
manner, the whole mass of material in the dream-thoughts. But of 
the four conditions necessary for dream-formation, the last rec- 
ognized is that whose exactions appear to be least binding upon 
the dream. The following consideration makes it seem very 
probable that this psychic function, which undertakes the so- 
called secondary elaboration of the dream-content, is identical 
with the work of our waking thought: Our waking (precon- 
scious) thought behaves towards any given perceptual material 
precisely as the function in question behaves towards the dream- 
content. It is natural to our waking thought to create order in 
such material, to construct relations, and to subject it to the 
requirements of an intelligible coherence. Indeed, we go rather 
too far in this respect; the tricks of conjurers befool us by tak- 
ing advantage of this intellectual habit of ours. In the effort to 
combine in an intelligible manner the sensory impressions which 
present themselves we often commit the most curious mistakes, 
and even distort the truth of the material before us. The proofs 
of this fact are so familiar that we need not give them further 
consideration here. We overlook errors which make nonsense of 



THE DREAM- WORK 


36l 

a printed page because we imagine the proper words. The editor 
of a widely read French journal is said to have made a bet that 
he could print the words “from in front” or “from behind” in 
every sentence of a long article without any of his readers notic- 
ing it. He won his bet. Years ago I came across a comical ex- 
ample of false association in a newspaper. After the session of 
the French Chamber in which Dupuy quelled the panic, caused 
by the explosion of a bomb thrown by an anarchist, with the 
courageous words, “La seance continue,” the visitors in the 
gallery were asked to testify as to their impressions of the out- 
rage. Among them were two provincials. One of these said that 
immediately after the end of a speech he had heard a detona- 
tion, but that he had thought that it was the parliamentary cus- 
tom to fire a shot whenever a speaker had finished. The other, 
who had apparently already listened to several speakers, had 
got hold of the same idea, but with this variation, that he sup- 
posed the shooting to be a sign of appreciation following a 
specially successful speech. 

Thus, the psychic agency which approaches the dream-con- 
tent with the demand that it must be intelligible, which subjects 
it to a first interpretation, and in doing so leads to the complete 
misunderstanding of it, is none other than our normal thought. 
In our interpretation the rule will be, in every case, to disregard 
the apparent coherence of the dream as being of suspicious 
origin and, whether the elements are confused or clear, to follow 
the same regressive path to the dream-material. 

At the same time, we note those factors upon which the above- 
mentioned (p. 218) scale of quality in dreams — from confusion 
to clearness — is essentially dependent. Those parts of the dream 
seem to us clear in which the secondary elaboration has been 
able to accomplish something; those seem confused where the 
powers of this performance have failed. Since the confused parts 
of the dream are often likewise those which are less vividly pre- 
sented, we may conclude that the secondary dream-work is re- 
sponsible also for a contribution to the plastic intensity of the 
individual dream-structures. 

If I seek an object of comparison for the definitive formation 
of the dream, as it manifests itself with the assistance of normal 



362 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

thinking, I can think of none better than those mysterious in- 
scriptions with which Die Fliegende Blatter has so long amused 
its readers. In a certain sentence which, for the sake of contrast, 
is in dialect, and whose significance is as scurrilous as possible, 
the reader is led to expect a Latin inscription. For this purpose 
the letters of the words are taken out of their syllabic groupings, 
and are rearranged. Here and there a genuine Latin word results; 
at other points, on the assumption that letters have been oblit- 
erated by weathering, or omitted, we allow ourselves to be de- 
luded about the significance of certain isolated and meaningless 
letters. If we do not wish to be fooled we must give up looking 
for an inscription, must take the letters as they stand, and 
combine them, disregarding their arrangement, into words of 
our mother tongue. 

The secondary elaboration is that factor of the dream-work 
which has been observed by most of the writers on dreams, and 
whose importance has been duly appreciated. Havelock Ellis 
gives an amusing allegorical description of its performances: “As 
a matter of fact, we might even imagine the sleeping conscious- 
ness as saying to itself: ‘Here comes our master, Waking Con- 
sciousness, who attaches such mighty importance to reason and 
logic and so forth. Quick! gather things up, put them in order — 
any order will do — before he enters to take possession/ ” 107 

The identity of this mode of operation with that of waking 
thought is very clearly stated by Delacroix in his Sur la structure 
logique du reve (p. 526) : u Cette fonction d’interpritation n’est 
pas particuliere au reve; c’est le meme travail de coordina- 
tion logique que nous faisons sur nos sensations pendant la 
vellie” 

J. Sully is of the same opinion ; and so is Tobowolska : “Sur ces 
successions incoMrentes d* hallucinations, V esprit s’efforce de 
faire le meme travail de coordination logique qu f il fait pendant 
la veille sur les sensations. II relie entre dies par un lien imag- 
inaire toutes ces images dicousues et bouche les ecarts trop grands 
quise trouvaient entre elles” (p. 93). 

Some authors maintain that this ordering and interpreting 
activity begins even in the dream and is continued in the waking 
107 The World of Dreams, pp. 10, 11, London, 1911. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


363 

state. Thus Paulhan (p. 547): “ Cependant fat souvent pense 
qu’il pouvait y avoir une certain deformation, ou plutot reforma- 
tion du reve dans le souvenir . . . . La tendence systematisante de 
Vimagination pourrait fort bien achever apres le reveil ce qu’clle 
a ebauche pendant le sommeiL De la sorte, la rapidity reelle de 
la pensee serait augment 6 e en apparence par les per feet ionne- 
ments dies a Vimagination eveillee” 

Leroy and Tobowolska (p. 592) : (< Dans le reve, au contraire, 
V interpretation et la coordination se font non seulement d Vaide 
des donnies du reve, mais encore a Vaide de celles de la 
veille . . . ” 

It was therefore inevitable that this one recognized factor of 
dream-formation should be over-estimated, so that the whole 
process of creating the dream was attributed to it. This creative 
work was supposed to be accomplished at the moment of waking, 
as was assumed by Goblot, and with deeper conviction by 
Foucault, who attributed to waking thought the faculty of creat- 
ing the dream out of the thoughts which emerged in sleep. 

In respect to this conception Leroy and Tobowolska express 
themselves as follows: “On a cru pouvoir placer le reve au mo- 
ment du reveil et ils ont attribui d la pensie de la veille la 
fonction de construire le rive avec les images presentes dans la 
pensie du sommeiL" 

To this estimate of the secondary elaboration I will add the 
one fresh contribution to the dream-work which has been indi- 
cated by the sensitive observations of H. Silberer. Silberer has 
caught the transformation of thoughts into images in flagranti, 
by forcing himself to accomplish intellectual work while in a 
state of fatigue and somnolence. The elaborated thought van- 
ished, and in its place there appeared a vision which proved to 
be a substitute for — usually abstract — thoughts. In these experi- 
ments it so happened that the emerging image, which may be 
regarded as a dream-element, represented something other than 
the thoughts which were waiting for elaboration: namely, the 
exhaustion itself, the difficulty or distress involved in this work; 
that is, the subjective state and the manner of functioning of the 
person exerting himself rather than the object of his exertions. 
Silberer called this case, which in him occurred quite often, the 



364 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

“functional phenomenon,” in contradistinction to the “material 
phenomenon 55 which he expected. 

“For example: one afternoon I am lying, extremely sleepy, 
on my sofa, but I nevertheless force myself to consider a philo- 
sophical problem. I endeavour to compare the views of Kant and 
Schopenhauer concerning time. Owing to my somnolence I do 
not succeed in holding on to both trains of thought, which would 
have been necessary for the purposes of comparison. After sev- 
eral vain efforts, I once more exert all my will-power to formu- 
late for myself the Kantian deduction in order to apply it to 
Schopenhauer's statement of the problem. Thereupon, I directed 
my attention to the latter, but when I tried to return to Kant, 
I found that he had again escaped me, and I tried in vain to 
fetch him back. And now this fruitless endeavour to rediscover 
the Kantian documents mislaid somewhere in my head suddenly 
presented itself, my eyes being closed, as in a dream-image, in 
the form of a visible, plastic symbol: I demand information of 
a grumpy secretary , who , bent over a desk, does not allow my 
urgency to disturb him; half straightening himself, he gives me 
a look of angry refusal.” 10 * 

Other examples, which relate to the fluctuation between sleep 
and waking: — 

“Example No. 2. — Conditions: Morning, while awaking. 
While to a certain extent asleep (crepuscular state), thinking 
over a previous dream, in a way repeating and finishing it, I feel 
myself drawing nearer to the waking state, yet I wish to remain 
in the crepuscular state. 

“Scene: I am stepping with one foot over a stream, but I at 
once pull it back again and resolve to remain on this side ” 100 

“Example No. 6. — Conditions the same as in Example No. 4 
(he wishes to remain in bed a little longer without oversleeping) . 
I wish to indulge in a little longer sleep. 

“Scene: I am saying good-bye to somebody, and I agree to 
meet him {or her) again before long” 

I will now proceed to summarize this long disquisition on the 

108 Jahrb., i, p. 514. 

109 Jahrb., iii, p. 62$. 



THE DREAM-WORK 


36s 

dream-work. We were confronted by the question whether in 
dream-formation the psyche exerts all its faculties to their full 
extent, without inhibition, or only a fraction of them, which are 
restricted in their action. Our investigations lead us to reject 
such a statement of the problem as wholly inadequate in the 
circumstances. But if, in our answer, we are to remain on the 
ground upon which the question forces us, we must assent to 
two conceptions which are apparently opposed and mutually 
exclusive. The psychic activity in dream-formation resolves 
itself into two achievements: the production of the dream- 
thoughts and the transformation of these into the dream-content. 
The dream-thoughts are perfectly accurate, and are formed with 
all the psychic profusion of which we are capable; they belong 
to the thoughts which have not become conscious, from which 
our conscious thoughts also result by means of a certain trans- 
position. There is doubtless much in them that is worth knowing, 
and also mysterious, but these problems have no particular rela- 
tion to our dreams, and cannot claim to be treated under the 
head of dream-problems . 110 On the other hand we have the 
process which changes the unconscious thoughts into the dream- 
content, which is peculiar to the dream-life and characteristic 
of it. Now, this peculiar dream-work is much farther removed 

110 Formerly I found it extraordinarily difficult to accustom my readers 
to the distinction between the manifest dream-content and the latent 
dream-thoughts. Over and over again arguments and objections were ad- 
duced from the uninterpreted dream as it was retained in the memory, and 
the necessity of interpreting the dream was ignored. But now, when the 
analysts have at least become reconciled to substituting for the manifest 
dream its meaning as found by interpretation, many of them are guilty of 
another mistake, to which they adhere just as stubbornly. They look for the 
essence of the dream in this latent content, and thereby overlook the dis- 
tinction between latent dream-thoughts and the dream-work. The dream is 
fundamentally nothing more than a special form of our thinking, which is 
made possible by the conditions of the sleeping state. It is the dream-work 
which produces this form, and it alone is the essence of dreaming — the 
only explanation of its singularity. I say this in order to correct the reader’s 
judgment of the notorious “prospective tendency” of dreams. That the 
dream should concern itself with efforts to perform the tasks with which 
our psychic life is confronted is no more remarkable than that our con- 
scious waking life should so concern itself, and I will only add that this 
work may be done also in the preconscious, a fact already familiar to us. 



366 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

from the pattern of waking thought than has been supposed by 
even the most decided depreciators of the psychic activity in 
dream-formation. It is not so much that it is more negligent, 
more incorrect, more forgetful, more incomplete than waking 
thought; it is something altogether different, qualitatively, from 
waking thought, and cannot therefore be compared with it. It 
does not think, calculate, or judge at all, but limits itself to the 
work of transformation. It may be exhaustively described if we 
do not lose sight of the conditions which its product must satisfy. 
This product, the dream, has above all to be withdrawn from the 
censorship, and to this end the dream-work makes use of the 
displacement of psychic intensities , even to the transvaluation of 
all psychic values; thoughts must be exclusively or predomi- 
nantly reproduced in the material of visual and acoustic mem- 
ory-traces, and from this requirement there proceeds the regard 
of the dream-work for represent ability, which it satisfies by fresh 
displacements. Greater intensities have (probably) to be pro- 
duced than are at the disposal of the night dream-thoughts, and 
this purpose is served by the extensive condensation to which the 
constituents of the dream-thoughts are subjected. Little atten- 
tion is paid to the logical relations of the thought-material; they 
ultimately find a veiled representation in the formal peculiarities 
of the dream. The affects of the dream-thoughts undergo slighter 
alterations than their conceptual content. As a rule, they are 
suppressed; where they are preserved, they are freed from the 
concepts and combined in accordance with their similarity. 
Only one part of the dream-work — the revision, variable in 
amount, which is effected by the partially awakened conscious 
thought — is at all consistent with the conception which the 
writers on the subject have endeavoured to extend to the whole 
performance of dream-formation. 



• VII 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM- 

PROCESSES 


Among the dreams which have been communicated to me by 
others there is one which is at this point especially worthy of our 
attention. It was told me by a female patient who had heard it 
related in a lecture on dreams. Its original source is unknown to 
me. This dream evidently made a deep impression upon the 
lady, since she went so far as to imitate it, i,e. to repeat the 
elements of this dream in a dream of her own; in order, by this 
transference, to express her agreement with a certain point in 
the dream. 

The preliminary conditions of this typical dream were as 
follows: A father had been watching day and night beside the 
sick-bed of his child. After the child died, he retired to rest in an 
adjoining room, but left the door ajar so that he could look 
from his room into the next, where the child’s body lay sur- 
rounded by tall candles. An old man, who had been installed as 
a watcher, sat beside the body, murmuring prayers. After sleep- 
ing for a few hours the father dreamed that the child was stand- 
ing by his bed , clasping his arm and crying reproachfully: 
“ Father , don’t you see that I am burning ?” The father woke up 
and noticed a bright light coming from the adjoining room. Rush- 
ing in, he found that the old man had fallen asleep, and the 
sheets and one arm of the beloved body were burnt by a fallen 
candle. 

The meaning of this affecting dream is simple enough, and 
the explanation given by the lecturer- as my patient reported it, 

367 



368 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

was correct. The bright light shining through the open door on 
to the sleeper’s eyes gave him the impression which he would 
have received had he been awake: namely, that a fire had been 
started near the corpse by a falling candle. It is quite possible that 
he had taken into his sleep his anxiety lest the aged watcher 
should not be equal to his task. 

We can find nothing to change in this interpretation; we can 
only add that the content of the dream must be overdetermined, 
and that the speech of the child must have consisted of phrases 
which it had uttered while still alive, and which were associated 
with important events for the father. Perhaps the complaint, 
“I am burning,” was associated with the fever from which the 
child died, and “Father, don’t you see?” to some other affective 
occurrence unknown to us. 

Now, when we have come to recognize that the dream has 
meaning, and can be fitted into the context of psychic events, it 
may be surprising that a dream should have occurred in circum- 
stances which called for such an immediate waking. We shall 
then note that even this dream is not lacking in a wish-fulfil- 
ment. The dead child behaves as though alive; he warns his 
father himself; he comes to his father’s bed and clasps his arm, 
as he probably did in the recollection from which the dream ob- 
tained the first part of the child’s speech. It was for the sake of 
this wish-fulfilment that the father slept a moment longer. The 
dream was given precedence over waking reflection because it 
was able to show the child still living. If the father had waked 
first, and had then drawn the conclusion which led him into the 
adjoining room, he would have shortened the child’s life by this 
one moment. 

There can be no doubt about the peculiar features in this brief 
dream which engage our particular interest. So far, we have en- 
deavoured mainly to ascertain wherein the secret meaning of 
the dream consists, how it is to be discovered, and what means 
the dream-work uses to conceal it. In other words, our greatest 
interest has hitherto been centred on the problems of interpre- 
tation. Now, however, we encounter a dream which is easily 
explained, and the meaning of which is without disguise; we note 
that nevertheless this dream preserves the essential character- 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 369 

istics which conspicuously differentiate a dream from our wak- 
ing thoughts, and this difference demands an explanation. It is 
only when we have disposed of all the problems of interpretation 
that we feel how incomplete is our psychology of dreams. 

But before we turn our attention to this new path of investi- 
gation, let us stop and look back, and consider whether we have 
not overlooked something important on our way hither. For we 
must understand that the easy and comfortable part of our 
journey lies behind us. Hitherto, all the paths that we have fol- 
lowed have led, if I mistake not, to light, to explanation, and to 
full understanding; but from the moment when we seek to pene- 
trate more deeply into the psychic processes in dreaming, all 
paths lead into darkness. It is quite impossible to explain the 
dream as a psychic process, for to explain means to trace back 
to the known, and as yet we have no psychological knowledge to 
which we can refer such explanatory fundamentals as may be 
inferred from the psychological investigation of dreams. On the 
contrary, we shall be compelled to advance a number of new 
assumptions, which do little more than conjecture the structure 
of the psychic apparatus and the play of the energies active in 
it; and we shall have to be careful not to go too far beyond the 
simplest logical construction, since otherwise its value will be 
doubtful. And even if we should be unerring in our inferences, 
and take cognizance of all the logical possibilities, we should 
still be in danger of arriving at a completely mistaken result, 
owing to the probable incompleteness of the preliminary state- 
ment of our elementary data. We shall not be able to arrive at 
any conclusions as to the structure and function of the psychic 
instrument from even the most careful investigation of dreams, 
or of any other isolated activity; or, at all events, we shall not 
be able to confirm our conclusions. To do this we shall have to 
collate such phenomena as the comparative study of a whole 
series of psychic activities proves to be reliably constant. So that 
the psychological assumptions which we base on the analysis of 
the dream-processes will have to mark time, as it were, until 
they can join up with the results of other investigations which, 
proceeding from another starting-point, will seek to penetrate 
to the heart of the same problem. 



$70 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


A. THE FORGETTING OF DREAMS 

I propose, then, that we shall first of all turn our attention to a 
subject which brings us to a hitherto disregarded objection, 
which threatens to undermine the very foundation of our efforts 
at dream-interpretation. The objection has been made from 
more than one quarter that the dream which we wish to interpret 
is really unknown to us, or, to be more precise, that we have no 
guarantee that we know it as it really occurred. 

What we recollect of the dream, and what we subject to our 
methods of interpretation, is, in the first place, mutilated by the 
unfaithfulness of our memory, which seems quite peculiarly in- 
capable of retaining dreams, and which may have omitted pre- 
cisely the most significant parts of their content. For when we 
try to consider our dreams attentively, we often have reason to 
complain that we have dreamed much more than we remember; 
that unfortunately we know nothing more than this one frag- 
ment, and that our recollection of even this fragment seems to 
us strangely uncertain. Moreover, everything goes to prove that 
our memory reproduces the dream not only incompletely but 
also untruthfully, in a falsifying manner. As, on the one hand, 
we may doubt whether what we dreamed was really as discon- 
nected as it is in our recollections, so on the other hand we may 
doubt whether a dream was really as coherent as our account of 
it; whether in our attempted reproduction we have not filled in 
the gaps which really existed, or those which are due to forget- 
fulness, with new and arbitrarily chosen material; whether we 
have not embellished the dream, rounded it off and corrected it, 
so that any conclusion as to its real content becomes impossible. 
Indeed, one writer (Spitta ) 1 surmises that all that is orderly 
and coherent is really first put into the dream during the at- 
tempt to recall it. Thus we are in danger of being deprived of 
the very object whose value we have undertaken to determine. 

In all our dream-interpretations we have hitherto ignored 
these warnings. On the contrary, indeed, we have found that the 
smallest, most insignificant, and most uncertain components of 
the dream-content invited interpretations no less emphatically 
than those which were distinctly and certainly contained in the 
1 Similar views are expressed by Foucault and Tannery. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 371 

dream. In the dream of Irma’s injection we read: “I quickly 
called in Dr. M.,” and we assumed that even this small addendum 
would not have got into the dream if it had not been susceptible 
of a special derivation. In this way we arrived at the history of 
that unfortunate patient to whose bedside I “quickly” called my 
older colleague. In the seemingly absurd dream which treated 
the difference between fifty-one and fifty-six as a quantite 
negligeable the number fifty-one was mentioned repeatedly. In- 
stead of regarding this as a matter of course, or a detail of indif- 
ferent value, we proceeded from this to a second train of thought 
in the latent dream-content, which led to the number fifty-one, 
and by following up this clue we arrived at the fears which pro- 
posed fifty-one years as the term of life in the sharpest opposi- 
tion to a dominant train of thought which was boastfully lavish 
of the years. In the dream “Non vixit ” I found, as an insignifi- 
cant interpolation, that I had at first overlooked the sentence: 
“As P. does not understand him , FL asks me” etc. The inter- 
pretation then coming to a standstill, I went back to these words, 
and I found through them the way to the infantile phantasy 
which appeared in the dream-thoughts as an intermediate point 
of junction. This came about by means of the poet’s verses: — 

“Selten habt ihr mich verstanden, 

Selten auch verstand ich Euch, 

Nur wenn wir im Kot uns fanden 
So verstanden wir uns gleichl” 

“(Seldom have you understood me, 

Seldom have I understood you, 

But when we found ourselves in the mire , 

We at once understood each other 1 ) ” 

Every analysis will afford evidence of the fact that the most 
insignificant features of the dream are indispensable to inter- 
pretation, and will show how the completion of the task is de- 
layed if we postpone our examination of them. We have given 
equal attention, in the interpretation of dreams, to every nuance 
of verbal expression found in them; indeed, whenever we were 
confronted by a senseless or insufficient wording, as though we 
had failed to translate the dream into the proper version, we 



372 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

have respected even these defects of expression. In brief, what 
other writers have regarded as arbitrary improvisations, con- 
cocted hastily to avoid confusion, we have treated like a sacred 
text. This contradiction calls for explanation. 

It would appear, without doing any injustice to the writers in 
question, that the explanation is in our favour. From the stand- 
point of our newly-acquired insight into the origin of dreams, 
all contradictions are completely reconciled. It is true that we 
distort the dream in our attempt to reproduce it; we once more 
find therein what we have called the secondary and often mis- 
understanding elaboration of the dream by the agency of nor- 
mal thinking. But this distortion is itself no more than a part 
of the elaboration to which the dream-thoughts are constantly 
subjected as a result of the dream-censorship. Other writers 
have here suspected or observed that part of the dream-distor- 
tion whose work is manifest; but for us this is of little conse- 
quence, as we know that a far more extensive work of distortion, 
not so easily apprehended, has already taken the dream for its 
object from among the hidden dream-thoughts. The only mis- 
take of these writers consists in believing the modification ef- 
fected in the dream by its recollection and verbal expression to 
be arbitrary, incapable of further solution, and consequently 
liable to lead us astray in our cognition of the dream. They 
underestimate the determination of the dream in the psyche. 
Here there is nothing arbitrary. It can be shown that in all cases 
a second train of thought immediately takes over the determina- 
tion of the elements which have been left undetermined by the 
first. For example, I wish quite arbitrarily to think of a number; 
but this is not possible; the number that occurs to me is defi- 
nitely and necessarily determined by thoughts within me which 
may be quite foreign to my momentary purpose. 2 The modifica- 
tions which the dream undergoes in its revision by the waking 
mind are just as little arbitrary. They preserve an associative 
connection with the content, whose place they take, and serve 
to show us the way to this content, which may itself be a substi- 
tute for yet another content. 

In analysing the dreams of patients I impose the following 
2 Cf. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DKEAM-PROCESSES 373 

test of this assertion, and never without success. If the first re- 
port of a dream seems not very comprehensible, I request the 
dreamer to repeat it. This he rarely does in the same words. But 
the passages in which the expression is modified are thereby 
made known to me as the weak points of the dreamt disguise; 
they are what the embroidered emblem on Siegfried’s raiment 
was to Hagen. These are the points from which the analysis may 
start. The narrator has been admonished by my announcement 
that I intend to take special pains to solve the dream, and im- 
mediately, obedient to the urge of resistance, he protects the 
weak points of the dream’s disguise, replacing a treacherous ex- 
pression by a less relevant one. He thus calls my attention to the 
expressions which he has discarded. From the efforts made to 
guard against the solution of the dream, I can also draw conclu- 
sions about the care with which the raiment of the dream has 
been woven. 

The writers whom I have mentioned are, however, less justi- 
fied when they attribute so much importance to the doubt with 
which our judgment approaches the relation of the dream. For 
this doubt is not intellectually warranted; our memory can give 
no guarantees, but nevertheless we are compelled to credit its 
statements far more frequently than is objectively justifiable. 
Doubt concerning the accurate reproduction of the dream, or 
of individual data of the dream, is only another offshoot of the 
dream-censorship, that is, of resistance to the emergence of the 
dream-thoughts into consciousness. This resistance has not yet 
exhausted itself by the displacements and substitutions which 
it has effected, so that it still clings, in the form of doubt, to 
what has been allowed to emerge. We can recognize this doubt 
all the more readily in that it is careful never to attack the in- 
tensive elements of the dream, but only the weak and indistinct 
ones. But we already know that a transvaluation of all the psy- 
chic values has taken place between the dream-thoughts and 
the dream. The distortion has been made possible only by de- 
valuation; it constantly manifests itself in this way and some- 
times contents itself therewith. If doubt is added to the indis- 
tinctness of an element of the dream-content, we may, following 
this indication, recognize in this element a direct off-shoot of 



374 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

one of the outlawed dream-thoughts. The state of affairs is like 
that obtaining after a great revolution in one of the republics 
of antiquity or the Renaissance. The once powerful, ruling fam- 
ilies of the nobility are now banished; all high posts are filled 
by upstarts; in the city itself only the poorer and most power- 
less citizens, or the remoter followers of the vanquished party, 
are tolerated. Even the latter do not enjoy the full rights of 
citizenship. They are watched with suspicion. In our case, in- 
stead of suspicion we have doubt. I must insist, therefore, that 
in the analysis of a dream one must emancipate oneself from 
the whole scale of standards of reliability; and if there is the 
slightest possibility that this or that may have occurred in the 
dream, it should be treated as an absolute certainty. Until one 
has decided to reject all respect for appearances in tracing the 
dream-elements, the analysis will remain at a standstill. Disre- 
gard of the element concerned has the psychic effect, in the per- 
son analysed, that nothing in connection with the unwished 
ideas behind this element will occur to him. This effect is really 
not self-evident; it would be quite reasonable to say, “Whether 
this or that was contained in the dream I do not know for cer- 
tain; but the following ideas happen to occur to me.” But no 
one ever does say so; it is precisely the disturbing effect of 
doubt in the analysis that permits it to be unmasked as an off- 
shoot and instrument of the psychic resistance. Psychoanalysis 
is justifiably suspicious. One of its rules runs: Whatever dis- 
turbs the progress of the work is a resistance . 3 

The forgetting of dreams, too, remains inexplicable until we 
seek to explain it by the power of the psychic censorship. The 

s This peremptory statement: “Whatever disturbs the progress of the work 
is a resistance” might easily be misunderstood. It has, of course, the signifi- 
cance merely of a technical rule, a warning for the analyst. It is not denied 
that during an analysis events may occur which cannot be ascribed to the 
intention of the person analysed. The patient's father may die in other 
ways than by being murdered by the patient, or a war may break out and 
interrupt the analysis. But despite the obvious exaggeration of the above 
statement there is still something new and useful in it. Even if the disturb- 
ing event is real and independent of the patient, the extent of the disturbing 
influence does often depend only on him, and the resistance reveals itself 
unmistakably in the ready and immoderate exploitation of such an oppor- 
tunity. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 375 

feeling that one has dreamed a great deal during the night and 
has retained only a little of it may have yet another meaning in 
a number of cases: it may perhaps mean that the dream- work 
has continued in a perceptible manner throughout the night, but 
has left behind it only one brief dream. There is, however, no 
possible doubt that a dream is progressively forgotten on wak- 
ing. One often forgets it in spite of a painful effort to recover it. 
I believe, however, that just as one generally overestimates the 
extent of this forgetting, so also one overestimates the lacunae 
in our knowledge of the dream due to the gaps occurring in it. 
All the dream-content that has been lost by forgetting can often 
be recovered by analysis; in a number of cases, at all events, it 
is possible to discover from a single remaining fragment, not the 
dream, of course — which, after all, is of no importance — but 
the whole of the dream-thoughts. It requires a greater expendi- 
ture of attention and self-suppression in the analysis; that is all; 
but it shows that the forgetting of the dream is not innocent of 
hostile intention . 4 

4 As an example of the significance of doubt and uncertainty in a dream 
with a simultaneous shrinking of the dream-content to a single element l 
will dte from my Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis the following 
dream, the analysis of which was successful, despite a short postpone- 
ment: — 

“ A sceptical lady patient has a rather long dream , in which it happens 
that certain persons tell her of my book on Wit, and praise it highly. Then 
something is said about a ‘ channel / perhaps another book in which * chan- 
nel '* occurs , or something else to do with ‘channel * . . . she doe$n*t know; it 
is quite vague . 

“You will, of course, be inclined to think that the element ‘channel* will 
resist analysis, because it is so indeterminate. You are right in assuming this 
difficulty, but it is not difficult because it is vague ; it is vague for the reason 
that makes the interpretation difficult. The dreamer could associate nothing 
with ‘channel*; and of course I could not suggest anything. A little while 
later— the following day, to be precise — she stated that something did occur 
to her which perhaps referred to ‘channel.’ It was, as a matter of fact, a 
witticism which she had heard someone repeat. On a steamer running be- 
tween Dover and Calais a well-known writer was talking to an Englishman, 
who in a certain connection quoted the aphorism: Du sublime au ridicule 
il n'y a qu*un pas. The writer retorted: Oui, le pas de Calais , whereby he 
wished to imply that he thought France sublime and England ridiculous. 
But the Pas de Calais is a channel, the Canal la Manche (the sleeve chan- 
nel). Do I think that this association has anything to do with the dream? 



376 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

A convincing proof of the tendencious nature of dream-for- 
getting — of the fact that it serves the resistance— is obtained on 
analysis by investigating a preliminary stage of forgetting. 5 It 
often happens that in the midst of an interpretation an omitted 
fragment of the dream suddenly emerges which is described as 
having been previously forgotten. This part of the dream that 
has been wrested from forgetfulness is always the most impor- 
tant part. It lies on the shortest path to the solution of the 
dream, and for that very reason it was most exposed to the 
resistance. Among the examples of the dreams that I have in- 
cluded in the text of this treatise, it once happened that I had 
subsequently to interpolate a fragment of dream-content. The 
dream is a dream of travel, which revenges itself on two unamia- 
ble travelling companions; I have left it almost entirely unin- 
terpreted, as part of its content is crudely obscene. The part 
omitted reads: “I said, referring to a book of Schiller’s: ‘It is 
from . . / but corrected myself, as 1 realized my mistake: ‘It 
is by . . / Whereupon the man remarked to his sister, ‘Yes, he 
said it correctly / " e 

Self-correction in dreams, which to some writers seems so 
wonderful, does not really call for consideration. But I will draw 
from my own memory an instance typical of verbal errors in 
dreams. I was nineteen years of age when I visited England for 

I certainly do ; it really furnishes the solution of this enigmatical dream- 
element. Can you doubt that this witticism already existed, before the 
dream, as the unconscious of the element ‘channel’ j can you assume that it 
was subsequently invented as an association? The association testifies to 
the scepticism concealed behind her obtrusive admiration, and the resistance 
is, of course, the common reason for both her hesitation in finding an asso- 
ciation and the indefinite character of the corresponding dream-element. 
Note the relation of the dream-element to the unconscious in this case. It 
is like a fragment of this unconscious, like an allusion to it; by its isolation 
it has become quite unintelligible 

5 Concerning the intention of forgetting in general, see my The Psycho- 
pathology of Everyday Life . 

6 Such corrections in the use of foreign languages are not rare in dreams, 
but they are usually attributed to foreigners. Maury, while he was 
studying English, once dreamed that he informed someone that he had 
called on him the day before in the following words: “I called for you 
yesterday.” The other answered, correctly: “You mean: I called on you 
yesterday.” 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 377 

the first time, and I spent a day on the shore of the Irish Sea. 
Naturally enough, I amused myself by picking up the marine 
animals left on the beach by the tide, and I was just examining 
a starfish (the dream begins with Hollthurn — Holothurian) 
when a pretty little girl came up to me and asked me: “Is it a 
starfish? Is it alive? 33 1 replied, “Yes, he is alive,” but then felt 
ashamed of my mistake, and repeated the sentence correctly. 
For the grammatical mistake which I then made, the dream 
substitutes another which is quite common among German peo- 
ple. “Das Buch ist von Schiller 33 is not to be translated by “the 
book is from, 33 but by “the book is by. 33 That the dream-work 
accomplishes this substitution, because the word from, owing to 
its consonance with the German adjective fromm (pious, de- 
vout) makes a remarkable condensation possible, should no 
longer surprise us after all that we have heard of the intentions 
of the dream-work and its unscrupulous selection of means. But 
what relation has this harmless recollection of the seashore to 
my dream? It explains, by means of a very innocent example, 
that I have used the word — the word denoting gender, or sex or 
the sexual (he) — in the wrong place. This is surely one of the 
keys to the solution of the dream. Those who have heard of the 
derivation of the book-title Matter and Motion (Moliere in Le 
Malade Imaginaire: La Matibre est-elle laudable? — A Motion 
of the bowels) will readily be able to supply the missing parts. 

Moreover, I can prove conclusively, by a demonstrate ad 
oculos, that the forgetting of the dream is in a large measure 
the work of the resistance. A patient tells me that he has 
dreamed, but that the dream has vanished without leaving a 
trace, as if nothing had happened. We set to work, however; I 
come upon a resistance which I explain to the patient; encourag- 
ing and urging him, I help him to become reconciled to some 
disagreeable thought; and I have heardly succeeded in doing so 
when he exclaims: “Now I can recall what I dreamed I” The 
same resistance which that day disturbed him in the work of 
interpretation caused him also to forget the dream. By over- 
coming this resistance I have brought back the dream to his 
memory. 

In the same way the patient, having reached a certain part of 



378 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

the work; may recall a dream which occurred three, four, or 
more days ago, and which has hitherto remained in oblivion/ 

Psychoanalytical experience has furnished us with yet another 
proof of the fact that the forgetting of dreams depends far more 
on the resistance than on the mutually alien character of the 
waking and sleeping states, as some writers have believed it to 
depend. It often happens to me, as well as to other analysts, and 
to patients under treatment, that we are waked from sleep by a 
dream, as we say, and that immediately thereafter, while in full 
possession of our mental faculties, we begin to interpret the 
dream. Often in such cases I have not rested until I have 
achieved a full understanding of the dream, and yet it has hap- 
pened that after waking I have forgotten the interpretation- 
work as completely as I have forgotten the dream-content itself, 
though I have been aware that I have dreamed and that I had 
interpreted the dream. The dream has far more frequently taken 
the result of the interpretation with it into forgetfulness than 
the intellectual faculty has succeeded in retaining the dream in 
the memory. But between this work of interpretation and the 
waking thoughts there is not that psychic abyss by which other 
writers have sought to explain the forgetting of dreams, — When 
Morton Prince objects to my explanation of the forgetting of 
dreams on the ground that it is only a special case of the amnesia 
of dissociated psychic states, and that the impossibility of ap- 
plying my explanation of this special amnesia to other types of 
amnesia makes it valueless even for its immediate purpose, he 
reminds the reader that in all his descriptions of such dissoci- 
ated states he has never attempted to discover the dynamic ex- 
planation underlying these phenomena. For had he done so, he 
would surely have discovered that repression (and the resistance 
produced thereby) is the cause not of these dissociations merely, 
but also of the amnesia of their psychic content. 

That dreams are as little forgotten as other psychic acts, that 
even in their power of impressing themselves on the memory 
they may fairly be compared with the other psychic perform- 

7 Ernest Jones describes an analogous case of frequent occurrence; during 
the analysis of one dream another dream of the same night is often recalled 
which until then was not merely forgotten, but was not even suspected. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 379 

ances, was proved to me by an experiment which I was able to 
make while preparing the manuscript of this book. I had pre- 
served in my notes a great many dreams of my own which, for 
one reason or another, I could not interpret, or, at the time of 
dreaming them, could interpret only very imperfectly. In order 
to obtain material to illustrate my assertion, I attempted to 
interpret some of them a year or two later. In this attempt I 
was invariably successful; indeed, I may say that the interpre- 
tation was effected more easily after all this time than when the 
dreams were of recent occurrence. As a possible explanation of 
this fact, I would suggest that I had overcome many of the in- 
ternal resistances which had disturbed me at the time of dream- 
ing. In such subsequent interpretations I have compared the 
old yield of dream-thoughts with the present result, which has 
usually been more abundant, and I have invariably found the 
old dream-thoughts unaltered among the present ones. How- 
ever, I soon recovered from my surprise when I reflected that 
I had long been accustomed to interpret dreams of former years 
that had occasionally been related to me by my patients as 
though they had been dreams of the night before; by the same 
method, and with the same success. In the section on anxiety- 
dreams I shall include two examples of such delayed dream-in- 
terpretations. When I made this experiment for the first time I 
expected, not unreasonably, that dreams would behave in this 
connection merely like neurotic symptoms. For when I treat a 
psychoneurotic, for instance, an hysterical patient, by psycho- 
analysis, I am compelled to find explanations for the first symp- 
toms of the malady, which have long since disappeared, as well 
as for those still existing symptoms which have brought the 
patient to me; and I find die former problem easier to solve 
than the more exigent one of to-day. In the Studies in Hysteria? 
published as early as 1895, 1 was able to give the explanation 
of a first hysterical attack which the patient, a woman over 
forty years of age, had experienced in her fifteenth year. 8 9 

8 Translated by A. A. Brill, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases Pub- 
lishing Co., New York. 

9 Dreams which have occurred during the first years of childhood, and 
which have sometimes been retained in the memory for decades with per- 



380 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

I will now make a few rather unsystematic remarks relating 
to the interpretation of dreams, which will perhaps serve as a 
guide to the reader who wishes to test my assertions by the 
analysis of his own dreams. 

He must not expect that it will be a simple and easy matter to 
interpret his own dreams. Even the observation of endoptic 
phenomena, and other sensations which are commonly immune 
from attention, calls for practice, although this group of obser- 
vations is not opposed by any psychic motive. It is very much 
more difficult to get hold of the “unwished ideas.” He who seeks 
to do so must fulfill the requirements laid down in this treatise, 
and while following the rules here given, he must endeavour to 
restrain all criticism, all preconceptions, and all affective or in- 
tellectual bias in himself during the work of analysis. He must 
be ever mindful of the precept which Claude Bernard held up 
to the experimenter in the physiological laboratory: “Travailler 
comme une bete ” — that is, he must be as enduring as an animal, 
and also as disinterested in the results of his work. He who will 
follow this advice will no longer find the task a difficult one. 
The interpretation of a dream cannot always be accomplished 
in one session; after following up a chain of associations you 
will often feel that your working capacity is exhausted; the 
dream will not tell you anything more that day; it is then best 
to break off, and to resume the work the following day. Another 
portion of the dream-content then solicits your attention, and 
you thus obtain access to a fresh stratum of the dream-thoughts. 
One might call this the “fractional” interpretation of dreams. 

It is most difficult to induce the beginner in dream-interpre- 
tation to recognize the fact that his task is not finished when he 
is in possession of a complete interpretation of the dream which 
is both ingenious and coherent, and which gives particulars of 
all the elements of the dream-content. Besides this, another in- 
terpretation, an over-interpretation of the same dream, one 
which has escaped him, may be possible. It is really not easy to 

feet sensorial freshness, are almost always of great importance for the 
understanding of the development and the neurosis of the dreamer. The 
analysis of them protects the physician from errors and uncertainties which 
might confuse him even theoretically. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 381 

form an idea of the wealth of trains of unconscious thought 
striving for expression in our minds, or to credit the adroitness 
displayed by the dream-work in killing — so to speak — seven 
flies at one stroke, like the journeyman tailor in the fairy-tale, 
by means of its ambiguous modes of expression. The reader will 
constantly be inclined to reproach the author for a superfluous 
display of ingenuity, but anyone who has had personal experi- 
ence of dream-interpretation will know better than to do so. 

On the other hand, I cannot accept the opinion first expressed 
by H. Silberer, that every dream — or even that many dreams, 
and certain groups of dreams — calls for two different interpreta- 
tions, between which there is even supposed to be a fixed relation. 
One of these, which Silberer calls the psychoanalytic interpreta- 
tion, attributes to the dream any meaning you please, but in the 
main an infantile sexual one. The other, the more important in- 
terpretation, which he calls the anagogic interpretation, reveals 
the more serious and often profound thoughts which the dream- 
work has used as its material. Silberer does not prove this asser- 
tion by citing a number of dreams which he has analysed in these 
two directions. I am obliged to object to this opinion on the 
ground that it is contrary to facts. The majority of dreams re- 
quire no over-interpretation, and are especially insusceptible of 
an anagogic interpretation. The influence of a tendency which 
seeks to veil the fundamental conditions of dream-formation and 
divert our interest from its instinctual roots is as evident in 
Silberer’s theory as in other theoretical efforts of the last few 
years. In a number of cases I can confirm Silberer’s assertions; 
but in these the analysis shows me that the dream-work was con- 
fronted with the task of transforming a series of highly abstract 
thoughts, incapable of direct representation, from waking life 
into a dream. The dream-work attempted to accomplish this task 
by seizing upon another thought-material which stood in loose 
and often allegorical relation to the abstract thoughts, and 
thereby diminished the difficulty of representing them. The 
abstract interpretation of a dream originating in this manner will 
be given by the dreamer immediately, but the correct interpreta- 
tion of the substituted material can be obtained only by means 
of the familiar technique. 


382 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

The question whether every dream can be interpreted is to 
be answered in the negative. One should not forget that in the 
work of interpretation one is opposed by the psychic forces that 
are responsible for the distortion of the dream. Whether one 
can master the inner resistances by one's intellectual interest, 
one’s capacity for self-control, one's psychological knowledge, 
and one's experience in dream-interpretation depends on the 
relative strength of the opposing forces. It is always possible to 
make some progress; one can at all events go far enough to 
become convinced that a dream has meaning, and generally far 
enough to gain some idea of its meaning. It very often happens 
that a second dream enables us to confirm and continue the 
interpretation assumed for the first. A whole series of dreams, 
continuing for weeks or months, may have a common basis, and 
should therefore be interpreted as a continuity. In dreams that 
follow one another we often observe that one dream takes as its 
central point something that is only alluded to in the periphery 
of the next dream, and conversely, so that even in their inter- 
pretations the two supplement each other. That different dreams 
of the same night are always to be treated, in the work of inter- 
pretation, as a whole, I have already shown by examples. 

In the best interpreted dreams we often have to leave one 
passage in obscurity because we observe during the interpreta- 
tion that we have here a tangle of dream-thoughts which cannot 
be unravelled, and which furnishes no fresh contribution to 
the dream-content. This, then, is the keystone of the dream, the 
point at which it ascends into the unknown. For the dream- 
thoughts which we encounter during the interpretation com- 
monly have no termination, but run in all directions into the 
netlike entanglement of our intellectual world. It is from some 
denser part of this fabric that the dream-wish then arises, like 
the mushroom from its mycelium. 

Let us now return to the facts of dream-forgetting. So far, 
of course, we have failed to draw any important conclusion from 
them. When our waking life shows an unmistakable intention to 
forget the dream which has been formed during the night, either 
as a whole, immediately after waking, or little by little in the 
course of the day, and when we recognize as the chief factor in 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 383 

this process of forgetting the psychic resistance against the 
dream which has already done its best to oppose the dream 
at night, the question then arises: What actually has made the 
dream-formation possible against this resistance? Let us con- 
sider the most striking case, in which the waking life has thrust 
the dream aside as though it had never happened. If we take 
into consideration the play of the psychic forces, we are com- 
pelled to assert that the dream would never have come into ex- 
istence had the resistance prevailed at night as it did by day. 
We conclude, then, that the resistance loses some part of its 
force during the night; we know that it has not been discon- 
tinued, as we have demonstrated its share in the formation of 
dreams — namely, the work of distortion. We have therefore to 
consider the possibility that at night the resistance is merely 
diminished, and that dream-formation becomes possible because 
of this slackening of the resistance; and we shall readily under- 
stand that as it regains its full power on waking it immediately 
thrusts aside what it was forced to admit while it was feeble. 
Descriptive psychology teaches us that the chief determinant of 
dream-formation is the dormant state of the psyche; and we 
may now add the following explanation: The state of sleep 
makes dr earn- formation possible by reducing the endopsychic 
censorship . 

We are certainly tempted to look upon this as the only pos- 
sible conclusion to be drawn from the facts of dream-forgetting, 
and to develop from this conclusion further deductions as to the 
comparative energy operative in the sleeping and waking states. 
But we shall stop here for the present. When we have penetrated 
a little farther into the psychology of dreams we shall find that 
the origin of dream-formation may be differently conceived. The 
resistance which tends to prevent the dream-thoughts from be- 
coming conscious may perhaps be evaded without suffering re- 
duction. It is also plausible that both the factors which favour 
dream-formation, the reduction as well as the evasion of the 
resistance, may be simultaneously made possible by the sleeping 
state. But we s hall pause here, and resume the subject a little 
later. 

We must now consider another series of objections against our 



384 the interpretation of dreams 

procedure in dream-interpretation. For we proceed by dropping 
all the directing ideas which at other times control reflection, 
directing our attention to a single element of the dream, noting 
the involuntary thoughts that associate themselves with this 
element. We then take up the next component of the dream- 
content, and repeat the operation with this; and, regardless of 
the direction taken by the thoughts, we allow ourselves to be led 
onwards by them, rambling from one subject to another. At the 
same time, we harbour the confident hope that we may in the 
end, and without intervention on our part, come upon the dream- 
thoughts from which the dream originated. To this the critic 
may make the following objection: That we arrive somewhere 
if we start from a single element of the dream is not remarkable. 
Something can be associatively connected with every idea. The 
only thing that is remarkable is that one should succeed in hit- 
ting upon the dream-thoughts in this arbitrary and aimless ex- 
cursion. It is probably a self-deception; the investigator follows 
the chain of associations from the one element which is taken up 
until he finds the chain breaking off, whereupon he takes up a 
second element; it is thus only natural that the originally un- 
confined associations should now become narrowed down. He 
has the former chain of associations still in mind, and will there- 
fore in the analysis of the second dream-idea hit all the more 
readily upon single associations which have something in com- 
mon with the associations of the first chain. He then imagines 
that he has found a thought which represents a point of junction 
between two of the dream-elements. As he allows himself all 
possible freedom of thought-connection, excepting only the 
transitions from one idea to another which occur in normal 
thinking, it is not difficult for him finally to concoct out of a 
series of “intermediary thoughts,” something which he calls the 
dream-thoughts; and without any guarantee, since they are 
otherwise unknown, he palms these off as the psychic equivalent 
of the dream. But all this is a purely arbitrary procedure, an 
ingenious-looking exploitation of chance, and anyone who will 
go to this useless trouble can in this way work out any desired 
interpretation for any dream whatever. 

If such objections are really advanced against us, we may in 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 38$ 

defense refer to the impression produced by our dream-interpre- 
tations, the surprising connections with other dream-elements 
which appear while we are following up the individual ideas, and 
the improbability that anything which so perfectly covers and 
explains the dream as do our dream-interpretations could be 
achieved otherwise than by following previously established psy- 
chic connections. We might also point to the fact that the proced- 
ure in dream-interpretation is identical with the procedure 
followed in the resolution of hysterical symptoms, where the 
correctness of the method is attested by the emergence and dis- 
appearance of the symptoms- -that is, where the interpretation 
of the text is confirmed by the interpolated illustrations. But we 
have no reason to avoid this problem — namely, how one can 
arrive at a pre-existent aim by following an arbitrarily and aim- 
lessly maundering chain of thoughts — since we shall be able not 
to solve the problem, it is true, but to get rid of it entirely. 

For it is demonstrably incorrect to state that we abandon our- 
selves to an aimless excursion of thought when, as in the inter- 
pretation of dreams, we renounce reflection and allow the invol- 
untary ideas to come to the surface. It can be shown that we are 
able to reject only those directing ideas which are known to us, 
and that with the cessation of these the unknown — or, as we 
inexactly say, unconscious — directing ideas immediately exert 
their influence, and henceforth determine the flow of the invol- 
untary ideas. Thinking without directing ideas cannot be ensured 
by any influence we ourselves exert on our own psychic life; 
neither do I know of any state of psychic derangement in which 
such a mode of thought establishes itself . 10 The psychiatrists 
10 Only recently has my attention been called to the fact that Ed, von Hart- 
mann took the same view with regard to this psychologically important 
point: Incidental to the discussion of the role of the unconscious in artistic 
creation {Philos, d. Unbew., Bd. i, Abschn. B,, Kap. V) Eduard von Hart- 
mann clearly enunciated the law of association of ideas which is directed by 
unconscious directing ideas, without however realizing the scope of this law. 
With him it was a question of demonstrating that “every combination of a 
sensuous idea when it is not left entirely to chance, but is directed to a defi- 
nite end, is in need of help from the unconscious,” and that the conscious 
interest in any particular thought-association is a stimulus for the uncon- 
scious to discover from among the numberless possible ideas the one which 
corresponds to the directing idea, “It is the unconscious that selects, and 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


386 

have here far too prematurely relinquished the idea of the solidity 
of the psychic structure. I know that an unregulated stream of 
thoughts, devoid of directing ideas, can occur as little in the realm 
of hysteria and paranoia as in the formation or solution of 
dreams. Perhaps it does not occur at all in the endogenous psychic 
affections, and, according to the ingenious hypothesis of Lauret, 
even the deliria observed in confused psychic states have mean- 
ing and are incomprehensible to us only because of omissions. I 
have had the same conviction whenever I have had an opportun- 
ity of observing such states. The deliria are the work of a 
censorship which no longer makes any effort to conceal its sway, 
which, instead of lending its support to a revision that is no 
longer obnoxious to it, cancels regardlessly anything to which it 
objects, thus causing the remnant to appear disconnected. This 
censorship proceeds like the Russian censorship on the frontier, 
which allows only those foreign journals which have had certain 
passages blacked out to fall into the hands of the readers to be 
protected. 

The free play of ideas following any chain of associations may 


appropriately, in accordance with the aims of the interest: and this holds 
true for the associations in abstract thinking ( as sensible representations 
and artistic combinations as well as for flashes of wit)” Hence, a limiting 
of the association of ideas to ideas that evoke and are evoked in the sense 
of pure association-psychology is untenable. Such a restriction “would be 
justified only if there were states in human life in which man was free not 
only from any conscious purpose, but also from the domination or co- 
operation of any unconscious interest, any passing mood. But such a state 
hardly ever comes to pass, for even if one leaves one’s train of thought 
seemingly altogether to chance, or if one surrenders oneself entirely to the 
involuntary dreams of phantasy , yet always other leading interests, domi- 
nant feelings and moods prevail at one time rather than another, and these 
will always exert an influence on the association of ideas ” (Philos, d. 
Unbew., 11® Aufl. i, 246). In semi-conscious dreams there always appear 
only such ideas as correspond to the (unconscious) momentary main inter- 
est. By rendering prominent the feelings and moods over the free thought- 
series, the methodical procedure of psychoanalysis is thoroughly justified 
even from the standpoint of Hartmann’s Psychology (N. E. Pohorilles, 
Internal. Zeitschrift. f. PsA., 1 , 1913, p. 605).— Du Prel concludes from 
the fact that a name which we vainly try to recall suddenly occurs to the 
mind that there is an unconscious but none the less purposeful thinking, 
whose result then appears in consciousness (Philos, d. Mystik, p. 107). 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 387 

perhaps occur in cases of destructive organic affections of the 
brain. What, however, is taken to be such in the psychoneuroses 
may always be explained as the influence of the censorship on a 
series of thoughts which have been pushed into the foreground 
by the concealed directing ideas . 11 It has been considered an 
unmistakable sign of free association unencumbered by directing 
ideas if the emerging ideas (or images) appear to be connected 
by means of the so-called superficial associations — that is, by 
assonance, verbal ambiguity, and temporal coincidence, without 
inner relationship of meaning; in other words, if they are con- 
nected by all those associations which we allow ourselves to 
exploit in wit and in playing upon words. This distinguishing 
mark holds good with associations which lead us from the ele- 
ments of the dream-content to the intermediary thoughts, and 
from these to the dream- thoughts proper; in many analyses of 
dreams we have found surprising examples of this. In these no 
connection was too loose and no witticism too objectionable to 
serve as a bridge from one thought to another. But the correct 
understanding of such surprising tolerance is not far to seek. 
Whenever one psychic element is connected with another by an 
obnoxious and superficial association, there exists also a correct 
and more profound connection between the two , which succumbs 
to the resistance of the censorship . 

The correct explanation for the predominance of the super- 
ficial associations is the pressure of the censorship, and not the 
suppression of the directing ideas. Whenever the censorship ren- 
ders the normal connective paths impassable, the superficial 
associations will replace the deeper ones in the representation. It 
is as though in a mountainous region a general interruption of 
traffic, for example an inundation, should render the broad high- 
ways impassable: traffic would then have to be maintained by 
steep and inconvenient tracks used at other times only by the 
hunter. 

We can here distinguish two cases which, however, are essen- 

11 Jung has br illian tly corroborated this statement by analyses of dementia 
praecox. (Cf. The Psychology of Dementia Praecox, translated by A. A. 
Brill. Monograph Series, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases Publish- 
ing Co., New York.) 



388 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

tially one. In the first case, the censorship is directed only against 
the connection of two thoughts which, 6eing detached from one 
another, escape its opposition. The two thoughts then enter suc- 
cessively into consciousness; their connection remains concealed; 
but in its place there occurs to us a superficial connection be- 
tween the two which would not otherwise have occurred to us, 
and which as a rule connects with another angle of the concep- 
tual complex instead of that from which the suppressed but 
essential comiection proceeds. Or, in the second case, both 
thoughts, owing to their content, succumb to the censorship; 
both then appear not in their correct form but in a modified, 
substituted form; and both substituted thoughts are so selected 
as to represent, by a superficial association, the essential relation 
which existed between those that they have replaced. Under the 
pressure of the censorship , the displacement of a normal and vital 
association by one superficial and apparently absurd has thus 
occurred in both cases . 

Because we know of these displacements, we unhesitatingly 
rely upon even the superficial associations which occur in the 
course of dream-interpretation. 12 

The psychoanalysis of neurotics makes abundant use of the 
two principles: that with the abandonment of the conscious 
directing ideas the control over the flow of ideas is transferred to 
the concealed directing ideas; and that superficial associations 
are only a displacement-substitute for suppressed and more pro- 
found ones. Indeed, psychoanalysis makes these two principles 
the foundation-stones of its technique. When I request a patient 
to dismiss all reflection, and to report to me whatever comes into 
his mind, I firmly cling to the assumption that he will not be 
able to drop the directing idea of the treatment, and I feel jus- 
tified in concluding that what he reports, even though it may 

12 The same considerations naturally hold good of the case in which super- 
ficial associations are exposed in the dream-content, as, for example, in both 
the dreams reported by Maury (p. 50, pelerinage—pelletier — pelle, kilom- 
eter — kilograms — gilolo, Lobelia — Lopez — Lotto). I know from my work 
with neurotics what kind of reminiscence is prone to represent itself in this 
manner. It is the consultation of encyclopedias by which most people have 
satisfied their need of an explanation of the sexual mystery when obsessed 
by the curiosity of puberty. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 389 

seem to be quite ingenuous and arbitrary, has some connection, 
with his morbid state. Another directing idea of which the patient 
has no suspicion is my own personality. The full appreciation, 
as well as the detailed proof of both these explanations, belongs 
to the description of the psychoanalytic technique as a thera- 
peutic method. We have here reached one of the junctions, so to 
speak, at which we purposely drop the subject of dream-inter- 
pretation . 13 

Of all the objections raised, only one is justified and still re- 
mains to be met: namely, that we ought not to ascribe all the 
associations of the interpretation-work to the nocturnal dream- 
work. By interpretation in the waking state we are actually 
opening a path running back from the dream-elements to the 
dream-thoughts. The dream-work has followed the contrary di- 
rection, and it is not at all probable that these paths are equally 
passable in opposite directions. On the contrary, it appears that 
during the day, by means of new thought-connections, we sink 
shafts that strike the intermediary thoughts and the dream- 
thoughts now in this place, now in that. We can see how the 
recent thought-material of the day forces its way into the inter- 
pretation-series, and how the additional resistance which has 
appeared since the night probably compels it to make new and 
further detours. But the number and form of the collaterals 
which we thus contrive during the day are, psychologically 
speaking, indifferent, so long as they point the way to the dream- 
thoughts which we are seeking. 

B. REGRESSION 

Now that we have defended ourselves against the objections 
raised, or have at least indicated our weapons of defence, we 
must no longer delay entering upon the psychological investiga- 
tions for which we have so long been preparing. Let us summar- 
ize the main results of our recent investigations: The dream is a 
psychic act full of import; its motive power is invariably a wish 
craving fulfilment; the fact that it is unrecognizable as a wish, 

13 The above statements, which when written sounded very improbable, 
have since been corroborated and applied experimentally by Jung and his 
pupils in the Diagnostiche Assoziationsstudien. 



390 THE INTERPRETATION OF BREAMS 

and its many peculiarities and absurdities, are due to the influ- 
ence of the psychic censorship to which it has been subjected 
during its formation. Besides the necessity of evading the cen- 
sorship, the following factors have played a part in its formation: 
first, a need for condensing the psychic material; second, regard 
for representability in sensory images; and third (though not 
constantly), regard for a rational and intelligible exterior of the 
dream-structure. From each of these propositions a path leads 
onward to psychological postulates and assumptions. Thus, the 
reciprocal relation of the wish-motives, and the four conditions, 
as well as the mutual relations of these conditions, must now be 
investigated; the dream must be inserted in the context of the 
psychic life. 

At the beginning of this section we cited a certain dream in 
order that it might remind us of the problems that are still un- 
solved. The interpretation of this dream (of the burning child) 
presented no difficulties, although in the analytical sense it was 
not given in full. We asked ourselves why, after all, it was neces- 
sary that the father should dream instead of waking, and we 
recognized the wish to represent the child as living as a motive 
of the dream. That there was yet another wish operative in the 
dream we shall be able to show after further discussion. For the 
present, however, we may say that for the sake of the wish- 
fulfilment the thought-process of sleep was transformed into a 
dream. 

If the wish-fulfilment is cancelled out, only one characteristic 
remains which distinguishes the two kinds of psychic events. The 
dream- thought would have been; “I see a glimmer coming from 
the room in which the body is lying. Perhaps a candle has fallen 
over, and the child is burning! ” The dream reproduces the result 
of this reflection unchanged, but represents it in a situation 
which exists in the present and is perceptible by the senses like 
an experience of the waking state. This, however, is the most 
common and the most striking psychological characteristic of 
the dream; a thought, usually the one wished for, is objectified 
in the dream, and represented as a scene, or — as we think — 
experienced. 

But how are we now to explain this characteristic peculiarity 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 391 

of the dream-work, or — to put it more modestly — how are we 
to bring it into relation with the psychic processes? 

On closer examination, it is plainly evident that the manifest 
form of the dream is marked by two characteristics which are 
almost independent of each other. One is its representation as a 
present situation with the omission of “perhaps”; the other is 
the translation of the thought into visual images and speech. 

The transformation to which the dream-thoughts are sub- 
jected because the expectation is put into the present tense is. 
perhaps, in this particular dream not so very striking. This is 
probably due to the special and really subsidiary role of the 
wish-fulfilment in this dream. Let us take another dream, in 
which the dream-wish does not break away from the continua- 
tion of the waking thoughts in sleep; for example, the dream of 
Irma’s injection. Here the dream-thought achieving representa- 
tion is in the conditional: “If only Otto could be blamed iot 
Irma’s illness!” The dream suppresses the conditional, and re- 
places it by a simple present tense: “Yes, Otto is to blame for 
Irma’s illness.” This, then, is the first of the transformations 
which even the undistorted dream imposes on the dream- 
thoughts. But we will not linger over this first peculiarity of the 
dream. We dispose of it by a reference to the conscious phan- 
tasy, the day-dream, which behaves in a similar fashion with its 
conceptual content. When Daudet’s M. Joyeuse wanders unem- 
ployed through the streets of Paris while his daughter is led to 
believe that he has a post and is sitting in his office, he dreams, 
in the present tense, of circumstances that might help him to 
obtain a recommendation and employment. The dream, then, 
employs the present tense in the same manner and with the same 
right as the day-dream. The present is the tense in which the 
wish is represented as fulfilled. 

The second quality peculiar to the dream alone, as distin- 
guished from the day-dream, is that the conceptual content is 
not thought, but is transformed into visual images, to which we 
give credence, and which we believe that we experience. Let us 
add, however, that not all dreams show this transformation of 
ideas into visual images. There are dreams which consist solely 
of thoughts, but we cannot on that account deny that they are 



392 THE INTERPRETATION' OF DREAMS 

substantially dreams. My dream “Autodidasker — the day-phan- 
tasy about Professor N.” is of this character; it is almost as free 
of visual elements as though I had thought its content during 
the day. Moreover, every long dream contains elements which 
have not undergone this transformation into the visual, and 
which are simply thought or known as we are wont to think or 
know in our waking state. And we must here reflect that this 
transformation of ideas into visual images does not occur in 
dreams alone, but also in hallucinations and visions, which may 
appear spontaneously in health, or as symptoms in the psycho- 
neuroses. In brief, the relation which we are here investigating 
is by no means an exclusive one; the fact remains, however, that 
this characteristic of the dream, whenever it occurs, seems to be 
its most noteworthy characteristic, so that we cannot think of the 
dream-life without it. To understand it, however, requires a very 
exhaustive discussion. 

Among all the observations relating to the theory of dreams 
to be found in the literature of the subject, I should like to lay 
stress upon one as being particularly worthy of mention. The 
famous G. T. H. Fechner makes the conjecture, 14, in a discussion 
as to the nature of the dreams, that the dream is staged else- 
where than in the waking ideation . No other assumption enables 
us to comprehend the special peculiarities of the dream-life. 

The idea which is thus put before us is one of psychic locality . 
We shall wholly ignore the fact that the psychic apparatus con- 
cerned is known to us also as an anatomical preparation, and 
we shall carefully avoid the temptation to determine the psychic 
locality in any anatomical sense. We shall remain on psycholog- 
ical ground, and we shall do no more than accept the invitation 
to think of the instrument which serves the psychic activities 
much as we think of a compound microscope, a photographic 
camera, or other apparatus. The psychic locality, then, corre- 
sponds to a place within such an apparatus in which one of the 
preliminary phases of the image comes into existence. As is well 
known, there are in the microscope and the telescope such ideal 
localities or planes, in which no tangible portion of the apparatus 
is located. I think it superfluous to apologize for the imperfec- 
tions of this and all similar figures. These comparisons are de- 
14 Psychophysikj Part II, p. 520. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 393 

signed only to assist us in our attempt to make intelligible the 
complication of the psychic performance by dissecting it arid 
referring the individual performances to the individual com- 
ponents of the apparatus. So far as I am aware, no attempt has 
yet been made to divine the construction of the psychic instru- 
ment by means of such dissection. I see no harm in such an 
attempt; I think that we should give free rein to our conjectures, 
provided we keep our heads and do not mistake the scaffolding 
for the building. Since for the first approach to any unknown 
subject we need the help only of auxiliary ideas, we shall prefer 
the crudest and most tangible hypothesis to all others. 

Accordingly, we conceive the psychic apparatus as a com- 
pound instrument, the component parts of which we shall call 
instances , or, for the sake of clearness, systems . We shall then 
anticipate that these systems may perhaps maintain a constant 
partial orientation to one another, very much as do the different 
and successive systems of lenses of a telescope. Strictly speaking, 
there is no need to assume an actual spatial arrangement of the 
psychic system. It will be enough for our purpose if a definite 
sequence is established, so that in certain psychic events the 
system will be traversed by the excitation in a definite temporal 
order. This order may be different in the case of other processes; 
such a possibility is left open. For the sake of brevity, we shall 
henceforth speak of the component parts of the apparatus as 
“^-systems.” 

The first thing that strikes us is the fact that the apparatus 
composed of ^-systems has a direction. All our psychic activities 
proceed from (inner or outer) stimuli and terminate in innerva- 
tions. We thus ascribe to the apparatus a sensory and a motor 
end; at the sensory end we find a system which receives the 
perceptions, and at the motor end another which opens the 
sluices of motility. The psychic process generally runs from the 
perceptive end to the motor end. The most general scheme of 
the psychic apparatus has therefore the following appearance as 
shown in Fig. 1 on page 394. But this is only in compliance with 
the requirement, long familiar to us, that the psychic apparatus 
must be constructed like a reflex apparatus. The reflex act re- 
mains the type of every psychic activity as well. 

We now have reason to admit a first differentiation at the 



THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


394 

sensory end. The percepts that come to ns leave in our psychic 
apparatus a trace, which we may call a memory-trace . The func- 
tion related to this memory-trace we call “the memory ” If we 
hold seriously to our resolution to connect the psychic processes 
p M 



Fig. i 


into systems, the memory-trace can consist only of lasting 
changes in the elements of the systems. But, as has already been 
shown elsewhere, obvious difficulties arise when one and the 
same system is faithfully to preserve changes in its elements and 
still to remain fresh and receptive in respect of new occasions of 
change. In accordance with the principle which is directing our 
attempt, we shall therefore ascribe these two functions to two 
different systems. We assume that an initial system of this ap- 
paratus receives the stimuli of perception but retains nothing of 
them— that is, it has no memory ; and that behind this there lies 
a second system, which transforms the momentary excitation 
of the first into lasting traces. The following would then be the 
diagram of our psychic apparatus: — 

P Mem Mem' Mem" M 



Fig. 2 

We know that of the percepts which act upon the P-system, we 
retain permanently something else as well as the content itself. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 3 9 J 

Our percepts prove also to be connected with one another in the 
memory, and this is especially so if they originally occurred 
simultaneously. We call this the fact of association . It is now 
clear that, if the P-system is entirely lacking in memory, it cer- 
tainly cannot preserve traces for the associations; the individual 
P-elements would be intolerably hindered in their functioning 
if a residue of a former connection should make its influence felt 
against a new perception. Hence we must rather assume that the 
memory-system is the basis of association. The fact of associa- 
tion, then, consists in this — that in consequence of a lessening 
of resistance and a smoothing of the ways from one of the mem - 
elements, the excitation transmits itself to a second rather than 
to a third mem-e lement. 

On further investigation we find it necessary to assume not 
one but many such mew-systems, in which the same excitation 
transmitted by the P-elements undergoes a diversified fixation. 
The first of these mem-systems will in any case contain the fixa- 
tion of the association through simultaneity, while in those lying 
farther away the same material of excitation will be arranged 
according to other forms of combination; so that relationships 
of similarity, etc., might perhaps be represented by these later 
systems. It would, of course, be idle to attempt to express in 
words the psychic significance of such a system. Its characteristic 
would lie in the intimacy of its relations to elements of raw 
material of memory — that is (if we wish to hint at a more com- 
prehensive theory) in the gradations of the conductive resistance 
on the way to these elements. 

An observation of a general nature, which may possibly point 
to something of importance, may here be interpolated. The P- 
system, which possesses no capacity for preserving changes, and 
hence no memory, furnishes to consciousness the complexity and 
variety of the sensory qualities. Our memories, on the other 
hand, are unconscious in themselves; those that are most deeply 
impressed form no exception. They can be made conscious, but 
there is no doubt that they unfold all their activities in the un- 
conscious state. What we term our character is based, indeed, on 
the memory-traces of our impressions, and it is precisely those 
impressions that have affected us most strongly, those of our 
early youth, which hardly ever become conscious. But when 



396 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

memories become conscious again they show no sensory quality, 
or a very negligible one in comparison with the perceptions* If, 
now, it can be confirmed that for consciousness memory and 
quality are mutually exclusive in the ^-systems, we have gained 
a most promising insight into the determinations of the neuron- 
excitations . 15 

What we have so far assumed concerning the composition of 
the psychic apparatus at the sensible end has been assumed 
regardless of dreams and of the psychological explanations which 
we have hitherto derived from them. Dreams, however, will 
serve as a source of evidence for our knowledge of another part 
of the apparatus. We have seen that it was impossible to explain 
dream-formation unless we ventured to assume two psychic “in- 
stances,” one of which subjected the activities of the other to 
criticism, the result of which was exclusion from consciousness. 

We have concluded that the criticizing “instance” maintains 
closer relations with the consciousness than the “instance” criti- 
cized. It stands between the latter and the consciousness like a 
screen. Further, we have found that there is reason to identify 
the criticizing “instance” with that which directs our waking life 
and determines our voluntary conscious activities. If, in accord- 
ance with our assumptions, we now replace these “instances” by 
systems, the criticizing system will therefore be moved to the 
motor end. We now enter both systems in our diagram, express- 
ing, by the names given them, their relation to consciousness. 



Fig. 3 

15 Since writing this, I have thought that consciousness occurs actually in 
the locality of the memory-trace. (Cf. Noth iiber den Wunderblock , 192$, 
Ges Schriften, Bd. viJ 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 397 

The last of the systems at the motor end we call the precon - 
scious (Pcs.) to denote that the exciting processes in this system 
can reach consciousness without any further detention, provided 
certain other conditions are fulfilled, e.g , the attainment of a 
definite degree of intensity, a certain apportionment of that 
function which we must call attention, etc. This is at the same 
time the system which holds the keys of voluntary motility. The 
system behind it we call the unconscious (£/cs.), because it has 
no access to consciousness except through the preconscious, in 
the passage through which the excitation-process must submit to 
certain changes . 16 

In which of these systems, then, do we localize the impetus to 
dream-formation? For the sake of simplicity, let us say in the 
system Ucs. We shall find, it is true, in subsequent discussions, 
that this is not altogether correct; that dream-formation is 
obliged to make connection with dream-thoughts which belong 
to the system of the preconscious. But we shall learn elsewhere, 
when we come to deal with the dream-wish, that the motive- 
power of the dream is furnished by the Ucs., and on account of 
this factor we shall assume the unconscious system as the 
starting-point for dream-formation. This dream-excitation, like 
all the other thought-structures, will now strive to continue itself 
in the Pcs., and thence to gain admission to the consciousness. 

Experience teaches us that the path leading through the pre- 
conscious to consciousness is closed to the dream-thoughts dur- 
ing the day by the resisting censorship. At night they gain ad- 
mission to consciousness; the question arises, In what way and 
because of what changes? If this admission were rendered pos- 
sible to the dream-thoughts by the weakening, during the night, 
of the resistance watching on the boundary between the uncon- 
scious and the preconscious, we should then have dreams in the 
material of our ideas, which would not display the hallucinatory 
character that interests us at present. 

The weakening of the censorship between the two systems, 
Ucs. and Pcs., can explain to us only such dreams as the “Auto- 

16 The further elaboration of this linear diagram will have to reckon with 
the assumption that the system following the Pcs. represents the one to 
which we must attribute consciousness (Cs .) , so that P = Cs. 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


398 

didasker” dream, but not dreams like that of the burning child, 
which — as will be remembered — we stated as a problem at the 
outset in our present investigations. 

What takes place in the hallucinatory dream we can describe 
in no other way than by saying that the excitation follows a 
retrogressive course. It communicates itself not to the motor end 
of the apparatus, but to the sensory end, and finally reaches the 
system of perception. If we call the direction which the psychic 
process follows from the unconscious into the waking state 
progressive, we may then speak of the dream as having a regres- 
sive character . 17 

This regression is therefore assuredly one of the most impor- 
tant psychological peculiarities of the dream-process; but we 
must not forget that it is not characteristic of the dream alone. 
Intentional recollection and other component processes of our 
normal thinking likewise necessitate a retrogression in the psychic 
apparatus from some complex act of ideation to the raw material 
of the memory-traces which underlie it. But during the waking 
state this turning backwards does not reach beyond the memory- 
images; it is incapable of producing the hallucinatory revival of 
the perceptual images. Why is it otherwise in dreams? When we 
spoke of the condensation-work of the dream we could not avoid 
the assumption that by the dream-work the intensities adhering 
to the ideas are completely transferred from one to another. It 
is probably this modification of the usual psychic process which 
makes possible the cathexis 18 of the system of P to its full sensory 
vividness in the reverse direction to thinking. 

I hope that we are not deluding ourselves as regards the im- 
portance of this present discussion. We have done nothing more 
than give a name to a inexplicable phenomenon. We call it re- 

17 The first indication of the element of regression is already encountered in 
the writings of Albertus Magnus. According to him the imaginatio con- 
structs the dream out of the tangible objects which it has retained. The 
process is the converse of that operating in the waking state. Hobbes states 
{Leviathan, 1651) : “In sum our dreams are the reverse of our imagination, 
the motion, when we are awake, beginning at one end, and when we dream 
at another” (quoted by Havelock Ellis, loc. cit , p. 112). 

18 [From the Greek Kathexo , to occupy, used here in place of the author’s 
term Besetzung , to signify a charge or investment of energy. — Trans,] 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 399 

gression if the idea in the dream is changed back into the visual 
image from which it once originated. But even this step requires 
justification. Why this definition if it does not teach us anything 
new? Well, I believe that the word regression is of service to us, 
inasmuch as it connects a fact familiar to us with the scheme of 
the psychic apparatus endowed with direction. At this point, 
and for the first time, we shall profit by the fact that we have 
constructed such a scheme. For with the help of this scheme we 
shall perceive, without further reflection, another peculiarity of 
dream-formation. If we look upon the dream as a process of 
regression within the hypothetical psychic apparatus, we have 
at once an explanation of the empirically proven fact that all 
thought-relations of the dream-thoughts are either lost in the 
dream-work or have difficulty in achieving expression. According 
to our scheme, these thought-relations are contained not in the 
first mew-systems, but in those lying farther to the front, and 
in the regression to the perceptual images they must forfeit ex- 
pression. In regression the structure oj the dream-thoughts 
breaks up into its raw material . 

But what change renders possible this regression which is 
impossible during the day? Let us here be content with an as- 
sumption. There must evidently be changes in the cathexis of 
the individual systems, causing the latter to become more acces- 
sible or inaccessible to the discharge of the excitation; but in 
any such apparatus the same effect upon the course of the excita- 
tion might be produced by more than one kind of change. We 
naturally think of the sleeping state, and of the many cathectic 
changes which this evokes at the sensory end of the apparatus. 
During the day there is a continuous stream flowing from the 
^-system of the P toward the motility end; this current ceases at 
night, and can no longer block the flow of the current of excita- 
tion in the opposite direction. This would appear to be that 
“seclusion from the outer world” which according to the theory 
of some writers is supposed to explain the psychological char- 
acter of the dream. In the explanation of the regression of the 
dream we shall, however, have to take into account those other 
regressions which occur during morbid waking states. In these 
other forms of regression the explanation just given plainly 



400 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

leaves us in the lurch. Regression occurs in spite of the uninter- 
rupted sensory current in a progressive direction. 

The hallucinations of hysteria and paranoia, as well as the 
visions of mentally normal persons, I would explain as corres- 
ponding, in fact, to regressions, i.e. to thoughts transformed into 
images; and would assert that only such thoughts undergo this 
transformation as are in intimate connection with suppressed 
memories, or with memories which have remained unconscious. 
As an example I will cite the case of one of my youngest hys- 
terical patients — a boy of twelve, who was prevented from fall- 
ing asleep by “green faces with red eyes,” which terrified him. 
The source of this manifestation was the suppressed, but once 
conscious memory of a boy whom he had often seen four years 
earlier, and who offered a warning example of many bad habits, 
including masturbation, for which he was now reproaching him- 
self. At that time his mother had noticed that the complexion of 
this ill-mannered boy was greenish and that he had red (i.e. red- 
rimmed) eyes. Hence his terrifying vision, which merely deter- 
mined his recollection of another saying of his mother's, to the 
effect that such boys become demented, are unable to learn any- 
thing at school, and are doomed to an early death. A part of this 
prediction came true in the case of my little patient; he could 
not get on at school, and, as appeared from his involuntary asso- 
ciations, he was in terrible dread of the remainder of the proph- 
ecy. However, after a brief period of successful treatment his 
sleep was restored, his anxiety removed, and he finished his 
scholastic year with an excellent record. 

Here I may add the interpretation of a vision described to me 
by an hysterical woman of forty, as having occurred when she 
was in normal health. One morning she opened her eyes and saw 
her brother in the room, although she knew him to be confined 
in an insane asylum. Her little son was asleep by her side. Lest 
the child should be frightened on seeing his uncle , and fall into 
convulsions, she pulled the sheet over his face. This done, the 
phantom disappeared. This apparition was the revision of one 
of her childish memories, which, although conscious, was most 
intimately connected with all the unconscious material in her 
mind. Her nurserymaid had told her that her mother, who had 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PRO CESSES 401 

died young (my patient was then only eighteen months old) , had 
suffered from epileptic or hysterical convulsions, which dated 
back to a fright caused by her brother (the patient’s uncle ) who 
appeared to her disguised as a spectre with a sheet over his head. 
The vision contains the same elements as the reminiscence, viz. 
the appearance of the brother, the sheet, the fright, and its effect. 
These elements, however, are arranged in a fresh context, and are 
transferred to other persons. The obvious motive of the vision, 
and the thought which it replaced, was her solicitude lest her 
little son, who bore a striking resemblance to his uncle, should 
share the latter’s fate. 

Both examples here cited are not entirely unrelated to the 
state of sleep, and may for that reason be unfitted to afford the 
evidence for the sake of which I have cited them. I will, therefore, 
refer to my analysis of an hallucinatory paranoiac woman pa- 
tient 10 and to the results of my hitherto unpublished studies on 
the psychology of the psychoneuroses, in order to emphasize the 
fact that in these cases of regressive thought-transformation one 
must not overlook the influence of a suppressed memory, or one 
that has remained unconscious, this being usually of an infantile 
character. This memory draws into the regression, as it were, 
the thoughts with which it is connected, and which are kept 
from expression by the censorship — that is, into that form of 
representation in which the memory itself is psychically existent. 
And here I may add, as a result of my studies of hysteria, that 
if one succeeds in bringing to consciousness infantile scenes 
(whether they are recollections or phantasies) they appear as 
hallucinations, and are divested of this character only when they 
are communicated. It is known also that even in persons whose 
memories are not otherwise visual, the earliest infantile mem- 
ories remain vividly visual until late in life. 

If, now, we bear in mind the part played in the dream- 
thoughts by the infantile experiences, or by the phantasies based 
upon them, and recollect how often fragments of these re- 
emerge in the dream-content, and how even the dream-wishes 

19 Selected Papers on Hysteria and other Psychoneuroses, p. 165, translated 
by A. A. Brill, Monograph Series, Journal of Nervous and Mental Diseases 
Publishing Co. 



402 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

often proceed from them, we cannot deny the probability that in 
dreams, too, the transformation of thoughts into visual images 
may be the result of the attraction exercised by the visually 
represented memory, striving for resuscitation, upon the thoughts 
severed from consciousness and struggling for expression. Pur- 
suing this conception, we may futher describe the dream as the 
substitute for the infantile scene modified by transference to 
recent material . The infantile scene cannot enforce Its own 
revival, and must therefore be satisfied to return as a 
dream. 

This reference to the significance of the infantile scenes (or of 
their phantastic repetitions) as in a certain degree furnishing the 
pattern for the dream-content renders superfluous the assump- 
tion made by Schemer and his pupils concerning inner sources 
of stimuli. Schemer assumes a state of “visual excitation,” of 
internal excitation in the organ of sight, when the dreams mani- 
fest a special vividness or an extraordinary abundance of visual 
elements. We need raise no objection to this assumption; we 
may perhaps content ourselves with assuming such a state of 
excitation only for the psychic perceptive system of the organ of 
vision; we shall, however, insist that this state of excitation is a 
reanimation by the memory of a former actual visual excitation. 
I cannot, from my own experience, give a good example showing 
such an influence of an infantile memory; my own dreams are 
altogether less rich in perceptual elements than I imagine those 
of others to be; but in my most beautiful and most vivid dream 
of late years I can easily trace the hallucinatory distinctness of 
the dream-contents to the visual qualities of recently received 
impressions. On page 32 7 1 mentioned a dream in which the dark 
blue of the water, the brown of the smoke issuing from the ship's 
funnels, and the sombre brown and red of the buildings which I 
saw made a profound and lasting impression upon my mind. 
This dream, if any, must be attributed to visual excitation, but 
what was it that had brought my organ of vision into this excit- 
able state? It was a recent impression which had joined itself to 
a series of former impressions. The colours I beheld were in the 
first place those of the toy blocks with which my children had 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 403 

erected a magnificent building for my admiration, on the day 
preceding the dream. There was the sombre red on the large 
blocks, the blue and brown on the small ones. Joined to these 
were the colour impressions of my last journey in Italy: the 
beautiful blue of the Isonzo and the lagoons, the brown hue of 
the Alps. The beautiful colours seen in the dream were but a 
repetition of those seen in memory. 

Let us summarize what we have learned about this peculiarity 
of dreams: their power of recasting their idea-content in visual 
images. We may not have explained this character of the dream- 
work by referring it to the known laws of psychology, but we 
have singled it out as pointing to unknown relations, and have 
given it the name of the regressive character. Wherever such 
regression has occurred, we have regarded it as an effect of the 
resistance which opposes the progress of thought on its normal 
way to consciousness, and of the simultaneous attraction exerted 
upon it by vivid memories . 20 The regression in dreams is perhaps 
facilitated by the cessation of the progressive stream flowing 
from the sense-organs during the day; for which auxiliary factor 
there must be some compensation, in the other forms of regres- 
sion, by the strengthening of the other regressive motives. We 
must also bear in mind that in pathological cases of regression, 
just as in dreams, the process of energy-transference must be 
different from that occurring in the regressions of normal psychic 
life, since it renders possible a full hallucinatory cathexis of the 
perceptive system. What we have described in the analysis of the 
dream-work as “regard for representability” may be referred to 
the selective attraction of visually remembered scenes touched by 
the dream-thoughts. 

As to the regression, we may further observe that it plays a no 
less important part in the theory of neurotic symptom-formation 
than in the theory of dreams. W T e may therefore distinguish a 
20 In a statement of the theory of repression it should be explained that a 
thought passes into repression owing to the co-operation of two of the fac- 
tors which influence it. On the one side (the censorship of Cs.) it is pushed, 
and from the other side (the Ucs.) it is pulled, much as one is helped to the 
top of the Great Pyramid. (Of. the Chapter Die Verdrdngung in Gts. 
Schrijten, Bd. v.) 


404 the interpretation op dreams 

threefold species of regression: (a) a topical one, in the sense of 
the scheme of the ^-systems here expounded; (b) a temporal 
one, in so far as it is a regression to older psychic formations; 
and (c) a formal one, when primitive modes of expression and 
representation take the place of the customary inodes. These 
three forms of regression are, however, basically one, and in the 
majority of cases they coincide, for that which is older in point 
of time is at the same time formally primitive and, in the psychic 
topography, nearer to the perception-end. 

We cannot leave the theme of regression in dreams without 
giving utterance to an impression which has already and repeat- 
edly forced itself upon us, and which will return to us reinforced 
after a deeper study of the psychoneuroses: namely, that dream- 
ing is on the whole an act of regression to the earliest relation- 
ships of the dreamer, a resuscitation of his childhood, of the 
impulses which were then dominant and the modes of expression 
which were then available. Behind this childhood of the indi- 
vidual we are then promised an insight into the phylogenetic 
childhood, into the evolution of the human race, of which the 
development of the individual is only an abridged repetition 
influenced by the fortuitous circumstances of life. We begin 
to suspect that Friedrich Nietzsche was right when he said that 
in a dream “there persists a primordial part of humanity which 
we can no longer reach by a direct path,” and we are encouraged 
to expect, from the analysis of dreams, a knowledge of the ar- 
chaic inheritance of man, a knowledge of psychical things in him 
that are innate. It would seem that dreams and neuroses have 
preserved for us more of the psychical antiquities than we sus- 
pected; so that psychoanalysis may claim a high rank among 
those sciences which endeavour to reconstruct the oldest and 
darkest phases of the beginnings of mankind. 

It is quite possible that we shall not find this first part of our 
psychological evaluation of dreams particularly satisfying. We 
must, however, console ourselves with the thought that we are, 
after all, compelled to build out into the dark. If we have not 
gone altogether astray, we shall surely reach approximately the 
same place from another starting-point, and then, perhaps, we 
shall be better able to find our bearings. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 


40 *; 


C. THE WISH-FULFILMENT 

The dream of the burning child (cited above) affords us a wel- 
come opportunity for appreciating the difficulties confronting 
the theory of wish-fulfilment. That a dream should be nothing 
but a wish-fulfilment must undoubtedly seem strange to us all — 
and not only because of the contradiction offered by the anxiety- 
dream. Once our first analyses had given us the enlightenment 
that meaning and psychic value are concealed behind our dreams, 
we could hardly have expected so unitary a determination of this 
meaning. According to the correct but summary definition of 
Aristotle, the dream is a continuation of thinking in sleep. Now 
if, during the day, our thoughts perform such a diversity of psy- 
chic acts — judgments, conclusions, the answering of objections, 
expectations, intentions, etc. — why should they be forced at 
night to confine themselves to the production of wishes only? 
Are there not, on the contrary, many dreams that present an 
altogether different psychic act in dream-form — for example, 
anxious care — and is not the father’s unusually transparent 
dream of the burning child such a dream? From the gleam of 
light that falls upon his eyes while he is asleep the father draws 
the apprehensive conclusion that a candle has fallen over and 
may be burning the body; he transforms this conclusion into a 
dream by embodying it in an obvious situation enacted in the 
present tense. What part is played in this dream by the wish- 
fulfilment? And how can we possibly mistake the predominance 
of the thought continued from the waking state or evoked by 
the new sensory impression? 

All these considerations are justified, and force us to look more 
closely into the role of the wish-fulfilment in dreams, and the 
significance of the waking thoughts continued in sleep. 

It is precisely the wish-fulfilment that has already caused us 
to divide all dreams into two groups. We have found dreams 
which were plainly wish-fulfilments; and others in which the 
wish-fulfilment was unrecognizable and was often concealed by 
every available means. In this latter class of dreams we recog- 
nized the influence of the dream-censorship. The undisguised 
wish-dreams were found chiefly in children ; shorty frank wish- 



406 the interpretation of dreams 

dreams seemed (I purposely emphasize this word) to occur also 
in adults. 

We may now ask whence in each case does the wish that is 
realized in the dream originate? But to what opposition or to 
what diversity do we relate this “whence”? I think to the oppo- 
sition between conscious daily life and an unconscious psychic 
activity which is able to make itself perceptible only at night. 
I thus find a threefold possibility for the origin of a wish. Firstly, 
it may have been excited during the day, and owing to external 
circumstances may have remained unsatisfied; there is thus left 
for the night an acknowledged and unsatisfied wish. Secondly, 
it may have emerged during the day, only to be rejected; there 
is thus left for the night an unsatisfied but suppressed wish. 
Thirdly, it may have no relation to daily life, but may belong to 
those wishes which awake only at night out of the suppressed 
material in us. If we turn to our scheme of the psychic apparatus, 
we can localize a wish of the first order in the system Pcs. We 
may assume that a wish of the second order has been forced back 
from the Pcs . system into the Ucs. system, where alone, if any- 
where, can it maintain itself; as for the wish-impulse of the third 
order, we believe that it is wholly incapable of leaving the Ucs. 
system. Now, have the wishes arising from these different sources 
the same value for the dream, the same power to incite a dream? 

On surveying the dreams at our disposal with a view to an- 
swering this question, we are at once moved to add as a fourth 
source of the dream-wish the actual wish-impetus which arises 
during the night (for example, the stimulus of thirst, and sexual 
desire). It then seems to us probable that the source of the 
dream-wish does not affect its capacity to incite a dream. I have 
in mind the dream of the child who continued the voyage that 
had been interrupted during the day, and the other children’s 
dreams cited in the same chapter; they are explained by an un- 
fulfilled but unsuppressed wish of the daytime. That wishes 
suppressed during the day assert themselves in dreams is shown 
by a great many examples. I will mention a very simple dream 
of this kind. A rather sarcastic lady, whose younger friend has 
become engaged to be married, is asked in the daytime by her 
acquaintances whether she knows her friend’s fiance, and what 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 407 

she thinks of him. She replies with unqualified praise, imposing 
silence on her own judgment, although she would have liked to 
tell the truth, namely, that he is a commonplace fellow — one 
meets such by the dozen (Dutzendmensch) . The following 
night she dreams that the same question is put to her, and that 
she replies with the formula: “In case of subsequent orders , it 
will suffice to mention the reference number ” Finally, as the 
result of numerous analyses, we learn that the wish in all dreams 
that have been subject to distortion has its origin in the uncon- 
scious, and could not become perceptible by day. At first sight, 
then, it seems that in respect of dream-formation all wishes are 
of equal value and equal power. 

I cannot prove here that this is not really the true state of 
affairs, but I am strongly inclined to assume a stricter determina- 
tion of the dream-wish. Children’s dreams leave us in no doubt 
that a wish unfulfilled during the day may instigate a dream. But 
we must not forget that this is, after all, the wish of a child; that 
it is a wish-impulse of the strength peculiar to childhood. I very 
much doubt whether a wish unfulfilled in the daytime would 
suffice to create a dream in an adult. It would rather seem that as 
we learn to control our instinctual life by intellection we more 
and more renounce as unprofitable the formation or retention 
of such intense wishes as are natural to childhood. In this, indeed, 
there may be individual variations; some retain the infantile 
type of the psychic processes longer than others; just as we find 
such differences in the gradual decline of the originally vivid 
visual imagination. In general, however, I am of the opinion that 
unfulfilled wishes of the day are insufficient to produce a dream 
in adults. I will readily admit that the wish-impulses originating 
in consciousness contribute to the instigation of dreams, but they 
probably do no more. The dream would not occur if the precon- 
scious wish were not reinforced from another source. 

That source is the unconscious. I believe that the conscious 
wish becomes effective in exciting a dream only when it succeeds 
in arousing a similar unconscious wish which reinforces it . From 
the indications obtained in the psychoanalysis of the neuroses, 
I believe that these unconscious wishes are always active and 
ready to express themselves whenever they find an opportunity 


408 the interpretation of dreams 

of allying themselves with an impulse from consciousness, and 
transferring their own greater intensity to the lesser intensity of 
the latter . 21 It must, therefore, seem that the conscious wish 
alone has been realized in the dream; but a slight peculiarity in 
the form of the dream will put us on the track of the powerful 
ally from the unconscious. These ever-active and, as it were, 
immortal wishes of our unconscious recall the legendary Titans 
who, from time immemorial, have been buried under the moun- 
tains which were once hurled upon them by the victorious gods, 
and even now quiver from time to time at the convulsions of 
their mighty limbs. These wishes, existing in repression, are 
themselves of infantile origin, as we learn from the psychological 
investigation of the neuroses. Let me, therefore, set aside the 
view previously expressed, that it matters little whence the 
dream-wish originates, and replace it by another, namely: the 
wish manifested in the dream must be an infantile wish . In the 
adult it originates in the Ucs., while in the child, in whom no 
division and censorship exist as yet between the Pcs . and Ucs ., 
or in whom these are only in process of formation, it is an unful- 
filled and unrepressed wish from the waking state. I am aware 
that this conception cannot be generally demonstrated, but I 
maintain that it can often be demonstrated even where one would 
not have suspected it, and that it cannot be generally refuted. 

In dream-formation, the wish-impulses which are left over 
from the conscious waking life are, therefore, to be relegated to 
the background. I cannot admit that they play any part except 
that attributed to the material of actual sensations during sleep 
in relation to the dream-content. If I now take into account those 
other psychic instigations left over from the waking life of the 
day, which are not wishes, I shall merely be adhering to the 
21 They share this character of indestructibility with all other psychic acts 
that are really unconscious — that is, with psychic acts belonging solely to 
the system Ucs. These paths are opened once and for all; they never fall into 
disuse; they conduct the excitation-process to discharge as often as they 
are charged again with unconscious excitation. To speak metaphorically, 
they suffer no other form of annihilation than did the shades of the lower 
regions in the Odyssey , who awoke to new life the moment they drank 
blood. The processes depending on the preconscious system are destructible 
in quite another sense. The psychotherapy of the neuroses is based on this 
difference. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY 03? THE DREAM-PROCESSES 409 

course mapped out for me by this line of thought. We may suc- 
ceed in provisionally disposing of the energetic cathexis of our 
waking thoughts by deciding to go to sleep. He is a good sleeper 
who can do this; Napoleon I is reputed to have been a model of 
this kind. But we do not always succeed in doing it, or in doing 
it completely. Unsolved problems, harassing cares, overwhelming 
impressions, continue the activity of our thought even during 
sleep, maintaining psychic processes in the system which we 
have termed the preconscious. The thought-impulses continued 
into sleep may be divided into the following groups: — 

1. Those which have not been completed during the day, ow- 
ing to some accidental cause. 

2. Those which have been left uncompleted because our men- 
tal powers have failed us, i.e. unsolved problems. 

3. Those which have been turned back and suppressed during 
the day. This is reinforced by a powerful fourth group: — 

4. Those which have been excited in our Ucs. during the day 
by the workings of the Pcs.; and finally we may add a fifth, 
consisting of: — 

5. The indifferent impressions of the day, which have there- 
fore been left unsettled. 

We need not underrate the psychic intensities introduced into 
sleep by these residues of the day’s waking life, especially those 
emanating from the group of the unsolved issues. It is certain 
that these excitations continue to strive for expression during 
the night, and we may assume with equal certainty that the state 
of sleep renders impossible the usual continuance of the process 
of excitation in the preconscious and its termination in becoming 
conscious. In so far as we can become conscious of our mental 
processes in the ordinary way, even during the night, to that 
extent we are simply not asleep. I cannot say what change is 
produced in the Pcs. system by the state of sleep, 22 but there is 

zz I have endeavoured to penetrate farther into the relations of the sleeping 
state and the conditions of hallucination in my essay, Metapsychological 
Supplement to the Theory of Dreams. Collected Papers , vol, iv, p. 137 
{Metapsychologische Ergdnzung zur Traumlehre. Int. Zeitschr . /. PsA. iv, 
1916-18, Ges. Schriften , Bd. v, p. 520). 



410 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

no doubt that the psychological characteristics of sleep are to be 
sought mainly in the cathectic changes occurring just in this 
system, which dominates, moreover, the approach to motility, 
paralysed during sleep. On the other hand, I have found nothing 
in the psychology of dreams to warrant the assumption that 
sleep produces any but secondary changes in the conditions of 
the Ucs. system. Hence, for the nocturnal excitations in the Pcs . 
there remains no other path than that taken by the wish-excita- 
tions from the Ucs.; they must seek reinforcement from the Ucs v 
and follow the detours of the unconscious excitations. But what 
is the relation of the preconscious day-residues to the dream? 
There is no doubt that they penetrate abundantly into the 
dream; that they utilize the dream-content to obtrude them- 
selves upon consciousness even during the night; indeed, they 
sometimes even dominate the dream-content, and impel it to 
continue the work of the day; it is also certain that the day- 
residues may just as well have any other character as that of 
wishes. But it is highly instructive, and for the theory of wish- 
fulfillment of quite decisive importance, to see what conditions 
they must comply with in order to be received into the dream. 

Let us pick out one of the dreams cited above, e.g. the dream 
in which my friend Otto seems to show the symptoms of Base - 
dow’s disease (p. 168). Otto’s appearance gave me some concern 
during the day, and this worry, like everything else relating to 
him, greatly affected me. I may assume that this concern followed 
me into sleep. I was probably bent on finding out what was the 
matter with him. During the night my concern found expression 
in the dream which I have recorded. Not only was its content 
senseless, but it failed to show any wish-fulfilment. But I began 
to search for the source of this incongruous expression of the 
solicitude felt during the day, and analysis revealed a connection. 
I identified my friend Otto with a certain Baron L. and myself 
with a Professor R. There was only one explanation of my being 
impelled to select just this substitute for the day-thought. I 
must always have been ready in the Ucs. to identify myself with 
Professor R., as this meant the realization of one of the immortal 
infantile wishes, viz. the wish to become great. Repulsive ideas 
respecting my friend, ideas that would certainly have been repu- 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 411 

diated in a waking state, took advantage of the opportunity to 
creep into the dream; but the worry of the day had likewise 
found some sort of expression by means of a substitute in the 
dream-content. The day-thought, which was in itself not a wish, 
but on the contrary a worry, had in some way to find a connection 
with some infantile wish, now unconscious and suppressed, 
which then allowed it — duly dressed up — to “arise” for con- 
sciousness. The more domineering the worry the more forced 
could be the connection to be established; between the content 
of the wish and that of the worry there need be no connection, 
nor was there one in our example. 

It would perhaps be appropriate, in dealing with this problem, 
to inquire how a dream behaves when material is offered to it in 
the dream-thoughts which flatly opposes a wish-fulfilment; such 
as justified worries, painful reflections and distressing realiza- 
tions. The many possible results may be classified as follows: 
(a) The dream-work succeeds in replacing all painful ideas by 
contrary ideas, and suppressing the painful affect belonging to 
them. This, then, results in a pure and simple satisfaction-dream, 
a palpable “wish-fulfilment,” concerning which there is nothing 
more to be said. ( b ) The painful ideas find their way into the 
manifest dream-content, more or less modified, but nevertheless 
quite recognizable. This is the case which raises doubts about 
the wish-theory of dreams, and thus calls for further investiga- 
tion. Such dreams with a painful content may either be indif- 
ferent in feeling, or they may convey the whole painful affect,- 
which the ideas contained in them seem to justify, or they may 
even lead to the development of anxiety to the point of waking. 

Analysis then shows that even these painful dreams are wish- 
fulfilments. An unconscious and repressed wish, whose fulfilment 
could only be felt as painful by the dreamer’s ego, has seized the 
opportunity offered by the continued cathexis of painful day- 
residues, has lent them its support, and has thus made them 
capable of being dreamed. But whereas in case ( a ) the uncon- 
scious wish coincided with the conscious one, in case (ft) the 
discord between the unconscious and the conscious — the re- 
pressed material and the ego — is revealed, and the situation in 
the fairy-tale, of the three wishes which the fairy offers to the 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


412 

married couple, is realized (see below, p, 434) • The gratification 
in respect of the fulfilment of the repressed wish may prove to 
be so great that it balances the painful affects adhering to the 
day-residues; the dream is then indifferent in its affective tone, 
although it is on the one hand the fulfilment of a wish, and on 
the other the fulfilment of a fear. Or it may happen that the 
sleep ego plays an even more extensive part in the dream- 
formation, that it reacts with violent resentment to the accom- 
plished satisfaction of the repressed wish, and even goes so far 
as to make an end of the dream by means of anxiety. It is thus 
not difficult to recognize that dreams of pain and anxiety are, in 
accordance with our theory, just as much wish-fulfilments as are 
the straightforward dreams of gratification. 

Painful dreams may also be “punishment dreams.” It must be 
admitted that the recognition of these dreams adds something 
that is, in a certain sense, new to the theory of dreams. What is 
fulfilled by them is once more an unconscious wish — the wish 
for the punishment of the dreamer for a repressed, prohibited 
wish-impulse. To this extent these dreams comply with the re- 
quirement here laid down: that the motive-power behind the 
dream-formation must be furnished by a wish belonging to the 
unconscious. But a finer psychological dissection allows us to 
recognize the difference between this and the other wish-dreams. 
In the dreams of group (6) the unconscious dream-forming wish 
belonged to the repressed material. In the punishment-dreams 
it is likewise an unconscious wish, but one which we must attrib- 
ute not to the repressed material but to the “ego.” 

Punishment-dreams point, therefore, to the possibility of a 
still more extensive participation of the ego in dream-formation. 
The mechanism of dream-formation becomes indeed in every 
way more transparent if in place of the antithesis “conscious” 
and “unconscious,” we put the antithesis: “ego” and “re- 
pressed.” This, however, cannot be done without taking into 
account what happens in the psychoneuroses, and for this reason 
it has not been done in this book. Here I need only remark that 
the occurrence of punishment-dreams is not generally subject 
to the presence of painful day-residues. They originate indeed 
most readily if the contrary is true, if the thoughts which are 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PRO CESSES 413 

day-residues are of a gratifying nature, but express illicit grati- 
fications. Of these thoughts nothing then finds its way into the 
manifest dream except their contrary, just as was the case in the 
dreams of group ( a ). Thus it would be the essential character- 
istic of punishment-dreams that in them it is not the unconscious 
wish from the repressed material (from the system Ucs.) that is 
responsible for dream-formation, but the punitive wish reacting 
against it, a wish pertaining to the ego, even though it is uncon- 
scious (i.e. preconscious) , 23 

I will elucidate some of the foregoing observations by means 
of a dream of my own, and above all I will try to show how the 
dream-work deals with a day-residue involving painful expec- 
tation: 

Indistinct beginning. I tell my wife 1 have some news for her , 
something very special . She becomes frightened, and does not 
wish to hear it. I assure her that on the contrary it is something 
whickwill please her greatly, and I begin to tell her that our son y s 
Officers * Corps has sent a sum of money ( 5,000 k.?) ... some- 
thing about honourable mention . . . distribution .. .at the same 
time I have gone with her into a small room, like a store-room , 
in order to fetch something from it. Suddenly I see my son ap- 
pear; he is not in uniform but rather in a tight-fitting sports suit 
(like a seal? ) with a small cap. He climbs onto a basket which 
stands to one side near a chest, in order to put something on this 
chest. I address him; no answer . It seems to me that his face or 
forehead is bandaged, he arranges something in his mouth , push- 
ing something into it. Also his hair shows a glint of grey. I reflect: 
Can he be so exhausted? And has he false teeth? Before I can 
address him again I awake without anxiety, but with palpita- 
tions. My clock points to 2.30 a.m. 

To give a full analysis is once more impossible. I shall there- 
fore confine myself to emphasizing some decisive points. Painful 
expectations of the day had given occasion for this dream; once 
again there had been no news for over a week from my son, who 
was fighting at the Front. It is easy to see that in the dream- 
content the conviction that he has been killed or wounded finds 

23 Here one may consider the idea of the super-ego which was later recog- 
nized by psychoanalysis. 



414 the interpretation of dreams 

expression. At the beginning of the dream one can observe an ener- 
getic effort to replace the painful thoughts by their contrary. I 
have to impart something very pleasing, something about sending 
money, honourable mention, and distribution. (The sum of 
money originates in a gratifying incident of my medical prac- 
tice; it is therefore trying to lead the dream away altogether 
from its theme.) But this effort fails. The boy's mother has a 
presentiment of something terrible and does not wish to listen. 
The disguises are too thin; the reference to the material to be 
suppressed shows through everywhere. If my son is killed, then 
his comrades will send back his property; I shall have to dis- 
tribute whatever he has left among his sisters, brothers and other 
people. Honourable mention is frequently awarded to an officer 
after he has died the “hero's death." The dream thus strives to 
give direct expression to what it at first wished to deny, whilst at 
the same time the wish-fulfilling tendency reveals itself by dis- 
tortion. (The change of locality in the dream is no doubt to be 
understood as threshold symbolism, in line with Silberer's view.) 
We have indeed no idea what lends it the requisite motive-power. 
But my son does not appear as “falling" (on the field of battle) 
but “climbing.” — He was, in fact, a daring mountaineer. — He 
is not in uniform, but in a sports suit; that is, the place of the 
fatality now dreaded has been taken by an accident which hap- 
pened to him at one time when he was ski-running, when he fell 
and fractured his thigh. But the nature of his costume, which 
makes him look like a seal, recalls immediately a younger person, 
our comical little grandson; the grey hair recalls his father, our 
son-in-law, who has had a bad time in the War. What does this 
signify? But let us leave this: the locality, a pantry, the chest, 
from which he wants to take something (in the dream, to put 
something on it), are unmistakable allusions to an accident of 
my own, brought upon myself when I was between two and three 
years of age. I climbed on a foot-stool in the pantry, in order to 
get something nice which was on a chest or table. The foot-stool 
tumbled over and its edge struck me behind the lower jaw. I 
might very well have knocked all my teeth out. At this point, an 
admonition presents itself: it serves you right— like a hostile 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 415 

impulse against the valiant warrior. A profounder analysis en- 
ables me to detect the hidden impulse, which would be able to 
find satisfaction in the dreaded mishap to my son. It is the envy 
of youth which the elderly man believes that he has thoroughly 
stifled in actual life. There is no mistaking the fact that it was 
the very intensity of the painful apprehension lest such a mis- 
fortune should really happen that searched out for its alleviation 
such a repressed wish-fulfilment. 

I can now clearly define what the unconscious wish means for 
the dream. I will admit that there is a whole class of dreams in 
which the incitement originates mainly or even exclusively from 
the residues of the day; and returning to the dream about my 
friend Otto, I believe that even my desire to become at last a 
professor extraordinarius would have allowed me to sleep in 
peace that night, had not the day’s concern for my friend’s health 
continued active. But this worry alone would not have produced 
a dream; the motive-power needed by the dream had to be con- 
tributed by a wish, and it was the business of my concern to find 
such a wish for itself, as the motive power of the dream. To put 
it figuratively, it is quite possible that a day-thought plays the 
part of the entrepreneur in the dream; but the entrepreneur , 
who, as we say, has the idea, and feels impelled to realize it, can 
do nothing without capital; he needs a capitalist who will defray 
the expense, and this capitalist, who contributes the psychic ex- 
penditure for the dream, is invariably and indisputably, what- 
ever the nature of the waking thoughts, a wish from the uncon- 
scious . 

In other cases the capitalist himself is the entrepreneur; this, 
indeed, seems to be the more usual case. An unconscious wish is 
excited by the day’s work, and this now creates the dream. And 
the dream-processes provide a parallel for all the other possi- 
bilities of the economic relationship here used as an illustration. 
Thus the entrepreneur may himself contribute a little of the 
capital, or several entrepreneurs may seek the aid of the same 
capitalist, or several capitalists may jointly supply the capital 
required by the entrepreneurs . Thus there are dreams sustained 
by more than one dream-wish, and many similar variations, 


THE INTERPRETATION OJ? DREAMS 


416 

which may be readily imagined, and which are of no further in- 
terest to us. What is still lacking to our discussion of the dream- 
wish we shall only be able to complete later on. 

The tertium comparationis in the analogies here employed, 
the quantitative element of which an allotted amount is placed 
at the free disposal of the dream, admits of a still closer applica- 
tion to the elucidation of the dream-structure. As shown on p. 
199, we can recognize in most dreams a centre supplied with a 
special sensory intensity. This is as a rule the direct representa- 
tion of the wish-fulfilment; for if we reverse the displacements 
of the dream-work we find that the psychic intensity of the ele- 
ments in the dream-thoughts is replaced by the sensory inten- 
sity of the elements in the dream-content. The elements in the 
neighbourhood of the wish-fulfilment have often nothing to do 
with its meaning, but prove to be the offshoots of painful thoughts 
which are opposed to the wish. But owing to their connection 
with the central element, often artificially established, they se- 
cure so large a share of its intensity as to become capable of 
representation. Thus, the representative energy of the wish- 
fulfilment diffuses itself over a certain sphere of association, 
within which all elements are raised to representation, including 
even those that are in themselves without resources. In dreams 
containing several dynamic wishes we can easily separate and 
delimit the spheres of the individual wish-fulfilments, and we 
shall find that the gaps in the dream are often of the nature of 
boundary-zones. 

Although the foregoing remarks have restricted the signifi- 
cance of the day-residues for the dream, they are none the less 
deserving of some further attention. For they must be a neces- 
sary ingredient in dream-formation, inasmuch as experience re- 
veals the surprising fact that every dream shows in its content 
a connection with a recent waking impression, often of the most 
indifferent kind. So far we have failed to understand the neces- 
sity for this addition to the dream-mixture (p. 84). This neces- 
sity becomes apparent only when we bear in mind the part played 
by the unconscious wish, and seek further information in the 
psychology of the neuroses. We shall then learn that an uncon- 
scious idea, as such, is quite incapable of entering into the pre- 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DKEAM-PROCESSES 417 

conscious, and that it can exert an influence there only by estab- 
lishing touch with a harmless idea already belonging to the 
preconscious, to which it transfers its intensity, and by which it 
allows itself to be screened. This is the fact of transference , which 
furnishes the explanation of so many surprising occurrences in 
the psychic life of neurotics. The transference may leave the 
idea from the preconscious unaltered, though the latter will thus 
acquire an unmerited intensity, or it may force upon this some 
modification derived from the content of the transferred idea. 
I trust the reader will pardon my fondness for comparisons with 
daily life, but I feel tempted to say that the situation for the re- 
pressed idea is like that of the American dentist in Austria, who 
may not carry on his practice unless he can get a duly installed 
doctor of medicine to serve him as a signboard and legal “cover.” 
Further, just as it is not exactly the busiest physicians who form 
such alliances with dental practitioners, so in the psychic life the 
choice as regards covers for repressed ideas does not fall upon 
such preconscious or conscious ideas as have themselves at- 
tracted enough of the attention active in the preconscious. The 
unconscious prefers to entangle with its connections either those 
impressions and ideas of the preconscious which have remained 
unnoticed as being indifferent or those which have immediately 
had attention withdrawn from them again (by rejection) . It is 
a well-known proposition of the theory of associations, con- 
firmed by all experience, that ideas which have formed a very 
intimate connection in one direction assume a negative type of 
attitude towards whole groups of new connections. I have even 
attempted at one time to base a theory of hysterical paralysis on 
this principle. 

If we assume that the same need of transference on the part 
of the repressed ideas, of which we have become aware through 
the analysis of the neurosis, makes itself felt in dreams also, we 
can at once explain two of the problems of the dream: namely, 
that every dream-analysis reveals an interweaving of a recent im- 
pression, and that this recent element is often of the most in- 
different character. We may add what we have already learned 
elsewhere, that the reason why these recent and indifferent ele- 
ments so frequently find their way into the dream-content as 


418 the interpretation of dreams 

substitutes for the very oldest elements of the dream-thoughts 
is that they have the least to fear from the resisting censorship. 
But while this freedom from censorship explains only the pref- 
erence shown to the trivial elements, the constant presence of 
recent elements points to the necessity for transference. Both 
groups of impressions satisfy the demand of the repressed ideas 
for material still free from associations, the indifferent ones be- 
cause they have offered no occasion for extensive associations, 
and the recent ones because they have not had sufficient time to 
form such associations. 

We thus see that the day-residues, among which we may now 
include the indifferent impressions, not only borrow something 
from the Ucs, when they secure a share in dream-formation — 
namely, the motive-power at the disposal of the repressed wish 
—-but they also offer to the unconscious something that is in- 
dispensable to it, namely, the points of attachment necessary for 
transference. If we wished to penetrate more deeply into the 
psychic processes, we should have to throw a clearer light on the 
play of excitations between the preconscious and the uncon- 
scious, and indeed the study of the psychoneuroses would impel 
us to do so; but dreams, as it happens, give us no help in this 
respect. 

Just one further remark as to the day-residues. There is no 
doubt that it is really these that disturb our sleep, and not our 
dreams which, on the contrary, strive to guard our sleep. But we 
shall return to this point later. 

So far we have discussed the dream-wish; we have traced it 
back to the sphere of the Ucs., and have analysed its relation to 
the day-residues, which, in their turn, may be either wishes, or 
psychic impulses of any other kind, or simply recent impres- 
sions. We have thus found room for the claims that can be made 
for the dream-forming significance of our waking mental ac- 
tivity in all its multifariousness. It might even prove possible to 
explain, on the basis of our train of thought, those extreme cases 
in which the dream, continuing the work of the day, brings to a 
happy issue an unsolved problem of waking life. We merely lack 
a suitable example to analyse, in order to uncover the infantile 
or repressed source of wishes, the tapping of which has so sue- 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 4*9 

cessfully reinforced the efforts of the preconscious activity. But 
we are not a step nearer to answering the question: Why is it that 
the unconscious can furnish in sleep nothing more than the 
motive-power for a wish-fulfilment? The answer to this question 
must elucidate the psychic nature of the state of wishing: and 
it will be given with the aid of the notion of the psychic ap- 
paratus. 

We do not doubt that this apparatus, too, has only arrived at 
its present perfection by a long process of evolution. Let us at- 
tempt to restore it as it existed in an earlier stage of capacity. 
From postulates to be confirmed in other ways we know that at 
first the apparatus strove to keep itself as free from stimulation 
as possible, and therefore, in its early structure, adopted the ar- 
rangement of a reflex apparatus, which enabled it promptly to 
discharge by the motor paths any sensory excitation reaching it 
from without. But this simple function was disturbed by the 
exigencies of life, to which the apparatus owes the impetus to- 
ward further development. The exigencies of life first confronted 
it in the form of the great physical needs. The excitation aroused 
by the inner need seeks an outlet in motility, which we may de- 
scribe as “internal change” or “expression of the emotions.” 
The hungry child cries or struggles helplessly. But its situation 
remains unchanged; for the excitation proceeding from the inner 
need has not the character of a momentary impact, but of a 
continuing pressure. A change can occur only if, in some way 
(in the case of the child by external assistance), there is an 
experience of satisfaction , which puts an end to the internal ex- 
citation. An essential constituent of this experience is the ap- 
pearance of a certain percept (of food in our example), the 
memory-image of which is henceforth associated with the mem- 
ory-trace of the excitation arising from the need. Thanks to the 
established connection, there results, at the next occurrence of 
this need, a psychic impulse which seeks to revive the memoiry- 
image of the former percept, and to re-evoke the former percept 
itself ; that is, it actually seeks to re-establish the situation of the 
first satisfaction. Such an impulse is what we call a wish; the 
reappearance of the perception constitutes the wish-fulfilment, 
and the full cathexis of the perception, by the excitation spring- 


420 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

ing from the need, constitutes the shortest path to the wish- 
fulfilment. We may assume a primitive state of the psychic ap- 
paratus in which this path is actually followed, i.e. in which the 
wish ends in hallucination. This first psychic activity therefore 
aims at an identity of perception: that is, at a repetition of that 
perception which is connected with the satisfaction of the need. 

This primitive mental activity must have been modified by 
bitter practical experience into a secondary and more appropri- 
ate activity. The establishment of identity of perception by the 
short regressive path within the apparatus does not produce the 
same result in another respect as follows upon cathexis of the 
same perception coming from without. The satisfaction does not 
occur, and the need continues. In order to make the internal 
cathexis equivalent to the external one, the former would have 
to be continuously sustained, just as actually happens in the 
hallucinatory psychoses and in hunger-phantasies, which ex- 
haust their performance in maintaining their hold on the object 
desired. In order to attain to more appropriate use of the psychic 
energy, it becomes necessary to suspend the full regression, so 
that it does not proceed beyond the memory-image, and thence 
can seek other paths, leading ultimately to the production of the 
desired identity from the side of the outer world . 24 This in- 
hibition, as well as the subsequent deflection of the excitation, 
becomes the task of a second system, which controls voluntary 
motility, i.e. a system whose activity first leads on to the use of 
motility for purposes remembered in advance. But all this com- 
plicated mental activity, which works its way from the memory- 
image to the production of identity of perception via the outer 
world, merely represents a roundabout way to wish- fulfilment 
made necessary by experience . 25 Thinking is indeed nothing but 
a substitute for the hallucinatory wish ; and if the dream is called 
a wish-fulfilment, this becomes something self-evident, since 
nothing but a wish can impel our psychic apparatus to activity. 

24 In other words: the introduction of a “test of reality” is recognized as 
necessary. 

25 Le Lorrain justly extols the wish-fulfilments of dreams: “Sans fatigue 
sirieuse, sans itre obligS de recourir & cette lutte opinidtre et longue qui use 
et corrode les jouissances poursuivies ” 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 42 1 

The dream, which fulfills its wishes by following the short re- 
gressive path, has thereby simply preserved for us a specimen of 
the primary method of operation of the psychic apparatus, 
which has been abandoned as inappropriate. What once pre- 
vailed in the waking state, when our psychic life was still young 
and inefficient, seems to have been banished into our nocturnal 
life; just as we still find in the nursery those discarded primitive 
weapons of adult humanity, the bow and arrow. Dreaming is a 
fragment of the superseded psychic life of the child . In the psy- 
choses those modes of operation of the psychic apparatus which 
are normally suppressed in the waking state reassert themselves f 
and thereupon betray their inability to satisfy our demands in 
the outer world . 26 

The unconscious wish-impulses evidently strive to assert them- 
selves even during the day, and the fact of transference, as well 
as the psychoses, tells us that they endeavour to force their way 
through the preconscious system to consciousness and the com- 
mand of motility. Thus, in the censorship between Ucs . and Pcs., 
which the dream forces us to assume, we must recognize and re- 
spect the guardian of our psychic health. But is it not careless- 
ness on the part of this guardian to diminish his vigilance at 
night, and to allow the suppressed impulses of the Ucs . to achieve 
expression, thus again making possible the process of hallu- 
cinatory regression? I think not, for when the critical guardian 
goes to rest — and we have proof that his slumber is not pro- 
found — he takes care to close the gate to motility. No matter 
what impulses from the usually inhibited Ucs . may bustle about 
the stage, there is no need to interfere with them ; they remain 
harmless, because they are not in a position to set in motion the 
motor apparatus which alone can operate to produce any change 
in the outer world. Sleep guarantees the security of the fortress 
which has to be guarded. The state of affairs is less harmless 
when a displacement of energies is produced, not by the decline 

26 I have further elaborated this train of thought elsewhere, where I have 
distinguished the two principles involved as the pleasure-principle and the 
reality-principle. “Formulations regarding the Two Principles in Mental 
Functioning,” Collected Papers , vol. iv, p. 13 ( Formulierungen iiber die 
zwei Prinzipien des psychischen Geschehens in Ges. Schriften , Bd. v, s. 409) . 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


422 

at night in the energy put forth by the critical censorship, but 
by the pathological enfeeblement of the latter, or the path- 
ological reinforcement of the unconscious excitations, and this 
while the preconscious is cathected and the gates of motility are 
open. The guardian is then overpowered; the unconscious ex- 
citations subdue the Pcs,, and from the Pcs . they dominate our 
speech and action, or they enforce hallucinatory regressions, 
thus directing an apparatus not designed for them by virtue of 
the attraction exerted by perceptions on the distribution of our 
psychic energy. We call this condition psychosis. 

We now find ourselves in the most favourable position for con- 
tinuing the construction of our psychological scaffolding, which 
we left after inserting the two systems, Ucs. and Pcs. However, 
we still have reason to give further consideration to the wish as 
the sole psychic motive-power in the dream. We have accepted 
the explanation that the reason why the dream is in every case a 
wish-fulfilment is that it is a function of the system Ucs., which 
knows no other aim than wish-fulfilment, and which has at its 
disposal no forces other than the wish-impulses. Now if we want 
to continue for a single moment longer to maintain our right to 
develop such far-reaching psychological speculations from the 
facts of dream-interpretation, we are in duty bound to show that 
they insert the dream into a context which can also embrace 
other psychic structures. If there exists a system of the Ucs . — 
or something sufficiently analogous for the purposes of our dis- 
cussion — the dream cannot be its sole manifestation; every 
dream may be a wish-fulfilment, but there must be other forms 
of abnormal wish-fulfilment as well as dreams. And in fact the 
theory of all psychoneurotic symptoms culminates in the one 
proposition that they, too, must be conceived as wish- fulfilments 
of the unconscious , 27 Our explanation makes the dream only 
the first member of a series of the greatest importance for the 
psychiatrist, the understanding of which means the solution of 
the purely psychological part of the psychiatric problem , 28 But 

27 Expressed more exactly: One portion of the symptom corresponds to the 
unconscious wish-fulfilment, while the other corresponds to the reaction- 
formation opposed to it. 

28 Hughlings Jackson has expressed himself as follows: “Find out all about 
dreams, and you will have found out all about insanity.” 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 


423 


in other members of this group of wish-fulfilments — for ex- 
ample, in the hysterical symptoms — I know of one essential 
characteristic which I have so far failed to find in the dream. 
Thus, from the investigations often alluded to in this treatise, I 
know that the formation of a hysterical symptom needs a junc- 
tion of both the currents of our psychic life. The symptom is 
not merely the expression of a realized unconscious wish; the 
latter must be joined by another wish from the preconsciou s, 
which is fulfilled by the same symptom; so that the symptom is 
at least doubly determined, once by each of the conflicting sys- 
tems. Just as in dreams, there is no limit to further over-deter- 
mination. The determination which does not derive from the 
Ucs. is, as far as I can see, invariably a thought-stream of reac- 
tion against the unconscious wish; for example, a self -punish- 
ment. Hence I can say, quite generally, that a hysterical symp- 
tom originates only where two contrary wish-fulfilments, having 
their source in different psychic systems, are able to meet in a 
single expression . 29 Examples would help us but little here, as 
nothing but a complete unveiling of the complications in ques- 
tion can carry conviction. I will therefore content myself with 
the bare assertion, and will cite one example, not because it 
proves anything, but simply as an illustration. The hysterical 
vomiting of a female patient proved, on the one hand, to be the 
fulfilment of an unconscious phantasy from the years of puberty 
— namely, the wish that she might be continually pregnant, and 
have a multitude of children; and this was subsequently supple- 
mented by the wish that she might have them by as many fathers 
as possible. Against this immoderate wish there arose a powerful 
defensive reaction. But as by the vomiting the patient might 
have spoilt her figure and her beauty, so that she would no longer 
find favour in any man’s eyes, the symptom was also in keeping 
with the punitive trend of thought, and so, being admissible on 
both sides, it was allowed to become a reality. This is the same 
way of acceding to a wish-fulfilment as the queen of the Par- 

29 Cf. my latest formulation of the origin of hysterical symptoms in the 
treatise on “Hysterical Phantasies and their Relation to Bisexuality,” Col- 
lected Papers, vol. ii, p. 51. This forms Chapter X in the English edition 
of Selected Papers on Hysteria and Other Psychoneuroses . 


THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


424 

thians was pleased to adopt in the case of the triumvir Crassus. 
Believing that he had undertaken his campaign out of greed for 
gold, she caused molten gold to be poured into the throat of the 
corpse. “Here thou hast what thou hast longed for ! ” 

Of the dream we know as yet only that it expresses a wish- 
fulfilment of the unconscious; and apparently the dominant pre- 
conscious system permits this fulfilment when it has compelled 
the wish to undergo certain distortions. We are, moreover, not 
in fact in a position to demonstrate regularly the presence of a 
train of thought opposed to the dream-wish, which is realized in 
the dream as well as its antagonist. Only now and then have we 
found in dream-analyses signs of reaction-products as, for in- 
stance, my affection for my friend R. in the “dream of my uncle” 
(p. 48). But the contribution from the preconscious which is 
missing here may be found in another place. The dream can pro- 
vide expression for a wish from the Ucs. by means of all sorts of 
distortions, once the dominant system has withdrawn itself into 
the wish to sleep, and has realized this wish by producing tho 
changes of cathexis within the psychic apparatus which are 
within its power; thereupon holding on to the wish in question 
for the whole duration of sleep. 30 

Now this persistent wish to sleep on the part of the precon- 
scious has a quite general facilitating effect on the formation of 
dreams. Let us recall the dream of the father who, by the gleam 
of light from the death-chamber, was led to conclude that his 
child’s body might have caught fire. We have shown that one of 
the psychic forces decisive in causing the father to draw this 
conclusion in the dream instead of allowing himself to be awak- 
ened by the gleam of light was the wish to prolong the life of the 
child seen in the dream by one moment. Other wishes originat- 
ing in the repressed have probably escaped us, for we are unable 
to analyse this dream. But as a second source of motive-power in 
this dream we may add the father’s desire to sleep, for, like the 
life of the child, the father’s sleep is prolonged for a moment by 
the dream. The underlying motive is: “Let the dream go on, or 

30 This idea has been borrowed from the theory of sleep of Lidbault, who 
revived hypnotic research in modem times (Du SommeU provoqui, etc., 
Paris, 1889) . 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 425 

1 must wake up.” As in this dream, so in all others, the wish to 
sleep lends its support to the unconscious wish. On page 24 we 
cited dreams which were manifestly dreams of convenience. But 
in truth all dreams may claim this designation. The efficacy of 
the wish to go on sleeping is most easily recognized in the awak- 
ening dreams, which so elaborate the external sensory stimulus 
that it becomes compatible with the continuance of sleep; they 
weave it into a dream in order to rob it of any claims it might 
make as a reminder of the outer world. But this wish to go on 
sleeping must also play its part in permitting all other dreams, 
which can only act as disturbers of the state of sleep from 
within. “Don’t worry; sleep on; it’s only a dream,” is in many 
cases the suggestion of the Pcs. to consciousness when the dream 
gets too bad; and this describes in a quite general way the at- 
titude of our dominant psychic activity towards dreaming, even 
though the thought remains unuttered. I must draw the conclu- 
sion that throughout the whole of our sleep we are just as certain 
that we are dreaming as we are certain that we are sleeping. It is 
imperative to disregard the objection that our consciousness is 
never directed to the latter knowledge, and that it is directed to 
the former knowledge only on special occasions, when the cen- 
sorship feels, as it were, taken by surprise. On the contrary, there 
are persons in whom the retention at night of the knowledge that 
they are sleeping and dreaming becomes quite manifest, and 
who are thus apparently endowed with the conscious faculty of 
guiding their dream-life. Such a dreamer, for example, is dis- 
satisfied with the turn taken by a dream; he breaks it off with- 
out waking, and begins it afresh, in order to continue it along 
different lines, just like a popular author who, upon request, 
gives a happier ending to his play. Or on another occasion, when 
the dream places him in a sexually exciting situation, he thinks 
in his sleep: “I don’t want to continue this dream and exhaust 
myself by an emission; I would rather save it for a real situation.” 

The Marquis Hervey (Vaschide) declared that he had gained 
such power over his dreams that he could accelerate their course 
at will, and turn them in any direction he wished. It seems that 
in him the wish to sleep had accorded a place to another, a pre- 
conscious wish, the wish to observe his dreams and to derive 



426 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

pleasure from them. Sleep is just as compatible with such a 
wish-resolve as it is with some proviso as a condition of waking 
up (wet-nurse’s sleep). We know, too, that in all persons an in- 
terest in dreams greatly increases the number of dreams remem- 
bered after waking. 

Concerning other observations as to the guidance of dreams, 
Ferenczi states: “The dream takes the thought that happens to 
occupy our psychic life at the moment, and elaborates it from 
all sides. It lets any given dream-picture drop when there is a 
danger that the wish-fulfilment will miscarry, and attempts a 
new kind of solution, until it finally succeeds in creating a wish- 
fulfilment that satisfies in one compromise both instances of the 
psychic life.” 

D. WAKING CAUSED BY DREAMS. THE FUNCTION OF DREAMS. 

THE ANXIETY-DREAM 

Now that we know that throughout the night the preconscious 
is orientated to the wish to sleep, we can follow the dream- 
process with proper understanding. But let us first summarize 
what we already know about this process. We have seen that 
day-residues are left over from the waking activity of the mind, 
residues from which it has not been possible to withdraw all 
cathexis. Either one of the unconscious wishes has been aroused 
through the waking activity during the day or it so happens that 
the two coincide; we have already discussed the multifarious 
possibilities. Either already during the day or only on the es- 
tablishment of the state of sleep the unconscious wish has made 
its way to the day-residues, and has effected a transference to 
them. Thus there arises a wish transferred to recent material; 
or the suppressed recent wish is revived by a reinforcement from 
the unconscious. This wish now endeavours to make its way to 
consciousness along the normal path of the thought processes, 
through the preconscious, to which indeed it belongs by virtue 
of one of its constituent elements. It is, however, confronted by 
the censorship which still subsists, and to whose influence it soon 
succumbs. It now takes on the distortion for which the way has 
already been paved by the transference to recent material. So 
far it is on the way to becoming something resembling an ob- 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 427 

session, a delusion, or the like, i.e. a thought reinforced by a 
transference, and distorted in expression owing to the censorship. 
But its further progress is now checked by the state of sleep of 
the preconscious; this system has presumably protected itself 
against invasion by diminishing its excitations. The dream- 
process, therefore, takes the regressive course, which is just 
opened up by the peculiarity of the sleeping state, and in so 
doing follows the attraction exerted on it by memory-groups, 
which are, in part only, themselves present as visual cathexis, 
not as translations into the symbols of the later systems. On its 
way to regression it acquires representability. The subject of 
compression will be discussed later. The dream-process has by 
this time covered the second part of its contorted course. The 
first part threads its way progressively from the unconscious 
scenes or phantasies to the preconscious, while the second part 
struggles back from the boundary of the censorship to the tract 
of the perceptions. But when the dream-process becomes a per- 
ception-content, it has, so to speak, eluded the obstacle set up 
in the Pcs. by the censorship and the sleeping state. It succeeds 
in drawing attention to itself, and in being remarked by con- 
sciousness. For consciousness, which for us means a sense-organ 
for the apprehension of psychic qualities, can be excited in wak- 
ing life from two sources: firstly, from the periphery of the whole 
apparatus, the perceptive system; and secondly, from the ex- 
citations of pleasure and pain which emerge as the sole psychic 
qualities yielded by the transpositions of energy in the interior 
of the apparatus. All other processes in the ^-systems, even 
those in the preconscious, are devoid of all psychic quality, and 
are therefore not objects of consciousness, inasmuch as they do 
not provide either pleasure or pain for its perception. We shall 
have to assume that these releases of pleasure and pain auto- 
matically regulate the course of the cathectic processes . But in 
order to make possible more delicate performances, it subse- 
quently proved necessary to render the flow of ideas more inde- 
pendent of pain-signals. To accomplish this, the Pcs. system 
needed qualities of its own which could attract consciousness, 
and most probably received them through the connection of the 
preconscious processes with the memory-system of speech- 



428 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

symbols, which was not devoid of quality. Through the qualities 
of this system, consciousness, hitherto only a sense-organ for 
perceptions, now becomes also a sense-organ for a part of our 
thought-processes. There are now, as it were, two sensory sur- 
faces, one turned toward perception and the other toward the 
preconscious thought-processes. 

I must assume that the sensory surface of consciousness which 
is turned to the preconscious is rendered far more unexcitable by 
sleep than the surface turned toward the P-system, The giving 
up of interest in the nocturnal thought-process is, of course, an 
appropriate procedure. Nothing is to happen in thought; the 
preconscious wants to sleep. But once the dream becomes per- 
ception, it is capable of exciting consciousness through the quali- 
ties now gained. The sensory excitation performs what is in fact 
its function; namely, it directs a part of the cathectic energy 
available in the Pcs . to the exciting cause in the form of atten- 
tion. We must therefore admit that the dream always has a 
waking effect — that is, it calls into activity part of the quiescent 
energy of the Pcs . Under the influence of this energy, it now 
undergoes the process which we have described as secondary 
elaboration with a view to coherence and comprehensibility. 
This means that the dream is treated by this energy like any 
other perception-content; it is subjected to the same anticipatory 
ideas as far, at least, as the material allows. As far as this third 
part of the dream-process has any direction, this is once more 
progressive. 

To avoid misunderstanding, it will not be amiss to say a few 
words as to the temporal characteristics of these dream-processes. 
In a very interesting discussion, evidently suggested by Maury’s 
puzzling guillotine dream, Goblot tries to demonstrate that a 
dream takes up no other time than the transition period between 
sleeping and waking. The process of waking up requires time; 
during this time the dream occurs. It is supposed that the final 
picture of the dream is so vivid that it forces the dreamer to 
wake; in reality it is so vivid only because when it appears the 
dreamer is already very near waking. “Un rive, c’est un reveil 
qui commence P 

It has already been pointed out by Dugas that Goblot, in 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 429 

order to generalize his theory, was forced to ignore a great many 
facts. There are also dreams from which we do not awaken; for 
example, many dreams in which we dream that we dream. From 
our knowledge of the dream-work, we can by no means admit 
that it extends only over the period of waking. On the contrary, 
we must consider it probable that the first part of the dream- 
work is already begun during the day, when we are still under 
the domination of the preconscious. The second phase of the 
dream-work, viz. the alteration by the censorship, the attraction 
exercised by unconscious scenes, and the penetration to per- 
ception, continues probably all through the night, and accord- 
ingly we may always be correct when we report a feeling that 
we have been dreaming all night, even although we cannot say 
what we have dreamed. I do not, however, think that it is neces- 
sary to assume that up to the time of becoming conscious the 
dream-processes really follow the temporal sequence which we 
have described; viz. that there is first the transferred dream- 
wish, then the process of distortion due to the censorship, and 
then the change of direction to regression, etc. We were obliged 
to construct such a sequence for the sake of description; in real- 
ity, however, it is probably rather a question of simultaneously 
trying this path and that, and of the excitation fluctuating to 
and fro, until finally, because it has attained the most apposite 
concentration, one particular grouping remains in the field. Cer- 
tain personal experiences even incline me to believe that the 
dream-work often requires more than one day and one night to 
produce its result, in which case the extraordinary art mani- 
fested in the construction of the dream is shorn of its miraculous 
character. In my opinion, even the regard for the comprehen- 
sibility of the dream as a perceptual event may exert its influ- 
ence before the dream attracts consciousness to itself. From this 
point, however, the process is accelerated, since the dream is 
henceforth subjected to the same treatment as any other per- 
ception. It is like fire works, which require hours for their 
preparation and then flare up in a moment. 

Through the dream-work, the dream-process now either gains 
sufficient intensity to attract consciousness to itself and to arouse 
the preconscious (quite independently of the time or profundity 



430 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

of sleep), or its intensity is insufficient, and it must wait in 
readiness until attention, becoming more alert immediately be- 
fore waking, meets it half-way. Most dreams seem to operate 
with relatively slight psychic intensities, for they wait for the 
process of waking. This, then, explains the fact that as a rule 
we perceive something dreamed if we are suddenly roused from 
a deep sleep. Here, as well as in spontaneous waking, our first 
glance lights upon the perception-content created by the 
dream-work, while the next falls on that provided by the outer 
world. 

But of greater theoretical interest are those dreams which are 
capable of waking us in the midst of our sleep. We may bear in 
mind the purposefulness which can be demonstrated in all other 
cases, and ask ourselves why the dream, that is, the uncon- 
scious wish, is granted the power to disturb our sleep, i.e. the ful- 
filment of the preconscious wish. The explanation is probably 
to be found in certain relations of energy which we do not yet 
understand. If we did so, we should probably find that the free- 
dom given to the dream and the expenditure upon it of a certain 
detached attention represent a saving of energy as against the 
alternative case of the unconscious having to be held in check at 
night just as it is during the day. As experience shows, dreaming, 
even if it interrupts our sleep several times a night, still remains 
compatible with sleep. We wake up for a moment, and immedi- 
ately fall asleep again. It is like driving off a fly in our sleep; we 
awake ad hoc . When we fall asleep again we have removed the 
cause of disturbance. The familiar examples of the sleep of wet- 
nurses, etc., show that the fulfilment of the wish to sleep is quite 
compatible with the maintenance of a certain amount of atten- 
tion in a given direction. 

But we must here take note of an objection which is based on 
a greater knowledge of the unconscious processes. We have our- 
selves described the unconscious wishes as always active, whilst 
nevertheless asserting that in the daytime they are not strong 
enough to make themselves perceptible. But when the state of 
sleep supervenes, and the unconscious wish has shown its power 
to form a dream, and with it to awaken the preconscious, why 
does this power lapse after cognisance has been taken of the 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 43 1 

dream? Would it not seem more probable that the dream should 
continually renew itself, like the disturbing fly which, when 
driven away, takes pleasure in returning again and again? What 
justification have we for our assertion that the dream removes 
the disturbance to sleep? 

It is quite true that the unconscious wishes are always active. 
They represent paths which are always practicable, whenever 
a quantum of excitation makes use of them. It is indeed an out- 
standing peculiarity of the unconscious processes that they are 
indestructible. Nothing can be brought to an end in the uncon- 
scious; nothing is past or forgotten. This is impressed upon us 
emphatically in the study of the neuroses, and especially of 
hysteria. The unconscious path of thought which leads to the 
discharge through an attack is forthwith passable again when 
there is a sufficient accumulation of excitation. The mortification 
suffered thirty years ago operates, after having gained access to 
the unconscious sources of affect, during all these thirty years 
as though it were a recent experience. Whenever its memory is 
touched, it revives, and shows itself to be cathected with ex- 
citation which procures a motor discharge for itself in an attack. 
It is precisely here that psychotherapy must intervene, its task 
being to ensure that the unconscious processes are settled and 
forgotten. Indeed, the fading of memories and the weak affect of 
impressions which are no longer recent, which we are apt to take 
as self-evident, and to explain as a primary effect of time on our 
psychic memory-residues, are in reality secondary changes 
brought about by laborious work. It is the preconscious that 
accomplishes this work; and the only course which psycho- 
therapy can pursue is to bring the Ucs. under the dominion of 
the Pcs. 

There are, therefore, two possible issues for any single uncon- 
scious excitation-process. Either it is left to itself, in which case 
it ultimately breaks through somewhere and secures, on this one 
occasion, a discharge for its excitation into motility, or it suc- 
cumbs to the influence of the preconscious, and through this its 
excitation becomes bound instead of being discharged . It is the 
latter case that occurs in the dream-process . The cathexis from 
the Pcs . which goes to meet the dream once this has attained to 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


432 

perception, because it has been drawn thither by the excitation 
of consciousness, binds the unconscious excitation of the dream 
and renders it harmless as a disturber of sleep. When the dreamer 
wakes up for a moment, he has really chased away the fly that 
threatened to disturb his sleep. We may now begin to suspect 
that it is really more expedient and economical to give way to 
the unconscious wish, to leave clear its path to regression so 
that it may form a dream, and then to bind and dispose of this 
dream by means of a small outlay of preconscious work, than to 
hold the unconscious in check throughout the whole period of 
sleep. It was, indeed, to be expected that the dream, even if 
originally it was not a purposeful process, would have seized 
upon some definite function in the play of forces of the psychic 
life. We now see what this function is. The dream has taken over 
the task of bringing the excitation of the Vcs. } which had been 
left free, back under the domination of the preconscious; it thus 
discharges the excitation of the Uc$., acts as a safety-valve for 
the latter, and at the same time, by a slight outlay of waking 
activity, secures the sleep of the preconscious. Thus, like the 
other psychic formations of its group, the dream offers itself as 
a compromise, serving both systems simultaneously, by fulfilling 
the wishes of both, in so far as they are mutually compatible. A 
glance at Robert’s “elimination theory” will show that we must 
agree with this author on his main point, namely, the determina- 
tion of the function of dreams, though we differ from him in our 
general presuppositions and in our estimation of the dream- 
process . 31 

31 Is this the only function which we can attribute to dreams ? I know of no 
other. A. Maeder, to be sure, has endeavoured to claim for the dream yet 
other “secondary” functions. He started from the just observation that 
many dreams contain attempts to provide solutions of conflicts, which are 
afterwards actually carried through. They thus behave like preparatory 
practice for waking activities. He therefore drew a parallel between dream- 
ing and the play of animals and children, which is to be conceived as a 
training of the inherited instincts, and a preparation for their later serious 
activity, thus setting up a fonctiott ludique for the dream. A little while 
before Maeder, Alfred Adler likewise emphasized the function of “thinking 
ahead” in the dream. (An analysis which I published in 1905 contained a 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 


433 


The above qualification — in so far as the two wishes are mu- 
tually compatible — contains a suggestion that there may be 
cases in which the function of the dream fails. The dream- 
process is, to begin with, admitted as a wish-fulfilment of the 
unconscious, but if this attempted wish-fulfilment disturbs the 
preconscious so profoundly that the latter can no longer main- 
tain its state of rest, the dream has broken the compromise, and 
has failed to perform the second part of its task. It is then at 
once broken off, and replaced by complete awakening. But even 
here it is not really the fault of the dream if, though at other 
times the guardian, it has now to appear as the disturber of 
sleep, nor need this prejudice us against its averred purposive 
character. This is not the only instance in the organism in which 
a contrivance that is usually to the purpose becomes inappro- 
priate and disturbing so soon as something is altered in the con- 
ditions which engender it; the disturbance, then, at all events 
serves the new purpose of indicating the change, and of bring- 
ing into play against it the means of adjustment of the organism. 
Here, of course, I am thinking of the anxiety-dream, and lest it 
should seem that I try to evade this witness against the theory of 
wish-fulfilment whenever I encounter it, I will at least give some 
indications as to the explanation of the anxiety-dream. 

That a psychic process which develops anxiety may still be a 
wish-fulfilment has long ceased to imply any contradiction for 
us. We may explain this occurrence by the fact that the wish be- 

dream which may be conceived as a resolution-dream, which was repeated 
night after night until it was realized.) 

But an obvious reflection must show us that this “secondary” function 
of the dream has no claim to recognition within the framework of any 
dream-interpretation. Thinking ahead, making resolutions, sketching out 
attempted solutions which can then perhaps be realized in waking life — 
these and many more performances are functions of the unconscious and 
preconscious activities of the mind which continue as “day-residues” in the 
sleeping state, and can then combine with an unconscious wish to form a 
dream ( see p. 416-7) . The function of “thinking ahead” in the dream is thus 
rather a function of preconscious waking thought, the result of which may 
be disclosed to us by the analysis of dreams or other phenomena. After the 
dream has so long been fused with its manifest content, one must now 
guard against confusing it with the latent dream-thoughts. 


434 THE interpretation of dreams 

longs to one system (the Ucs.), whereas the other system (the 
Pcs.) has rejected and suppressed it . 32 The subjection of the 
Ucs. by the Pcs. is not thoroughgoing even in perfect psychic 
health; the extent of this suppression indicates the degree of our 
psychic normality. Neurotic symptoms indicate to us that the 
two systems are in mutual conflict; the symptoms are the re- 
sult of a compromise in this conflict, and they temporarily put 
an end to it. On the one hand they afford the Ucs. a way out for 
the discharge of its excitation — they serve it as a kind of sally- 
gate — while, on the other hand, they give the Pcs. the possibility 
of dominating the Ucs. in some degree. It is instructive to con- 
sider, for example, the significance of a hysterical phobia, or of 
agoraphobia. A neurotic is said to be incapable of crossing the 
street alone, and this we should rightly call a “symptom.” Let 
someone now remove this symptom by constraining him to this 

32 “a second consideration, much more important and far-reaching, but 
equally overlooked by the laity, is the following. A wish-fulfilment must 
certainly bring some pleasure; but we go on to ask; To whom ? 7 Of course 
to the person who has the wish. But we know that the attitude of the 
dreamer towards his wishes is a peculiar one: he rejects them, censors them, 
in short, he will have none of them. Their fulfilment, then, can afford him 
no pleasure, rather the opposite, and here experience shows that this ‘oppo- 
site , 5 which has still to be explained, takes the form of anxiety. The 
dreamer, where his wishes are concerned, is like two separate people closely 
linked together by some important thing in common. Instead of enlarging 
upon this I will remind you of a well-known fairy-tale in which you will 
see these relationships repeated. A good fairy promised a poor man and his 
wife to fulfill their first three wishes. They were delighted, and made up 
their minds to choose the wishes carefully. But the woman was tempted by 
the smell of some sausages being cooked in the next cottage and wished for 
two like them. Lo 1 and behold, there they were — and the first wish was ful- 
filled. With that, the man lost his temper and in his resentment wished that 
the sausages might hang on the tip of his wife’s nose. This also came to pass, 
and the sausages could not be removed from their position; so the second 
wish was fulfilled, but it was the man’s wish and its fulfilment was most 
unpleasant for the woman. You know the rest of the story: as they were 
after all man and wife the third wish had to be that the sausages should 
come off the end of the woman’s nose. We might make use of this fairy- 
tale many times over in other contexts, but here it need only serve to illus- 
trate the fact that it is possible for the fulfillment of one person’s wish to 
be very disagreeable to someone else, unless the two people are entirely at 
one !” Introductory Lectures on Psycho-Analysis, London, 1929, pp. 182-83. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 43$ 

action which he deems himself incapable of performing. The re- 
sult will be an attack of anxiety, just as an attack of anxiety in 
the street has often been the exciting cause of the establishment 
of an agoraphobia. We thus learn that the symptom has been 
constituted in order to prevent the anxiety from breaking out. 
The phobia is thrown up before the anxiety like a frontier 
fortress. 

We cannot enlarge further on this subject unless we examine 
the role of the affects in these processes, which can only be done 
here imperfectly. We will therefore affirm the proposition that 
the principal reason why the suppression of the Ucs. becomes 
necessary is that if the movement of ideas in the Ucs. were al- 
lowed to run its course, it would develop an affect which orig- 
inally had the character of pleasure, but which, since the process 
of repression, bears the character of pain. The aim, as well as 
the result, of the suppression is to prevent the development of 
this pain. The suppression extends to the idea-content of the 
Ucs., because the liberation of pain might emanate from this 
idea-content. We here take as our basis a quite definite assump- 
tion as to the nature of the development of affect. This is re- 
garded as a motor or secretory function, the key to the innerva- 
tion of which is to be found in the ideas of the Ucs. Through the 
domination of the Pcs . these ideas are as it were strangled, that 
is, inhibited from sending out the impulse that would develop 
the affect. The danger which arises if cathexis by the Pcs. ceases 
thus consists in the fact that the unconscious excitations would 
liberate an affect that — in consequence of the repression that has 
previously occurred — could only be felt as pain or anxiety. 

This danger is released if the dream-process is allowed to have 
its own way. The conditions for its realization are, that repres- 
sions shall have occurred, and that the suppressed wish-impulses 
can become sufficiently strong. They, therefore, fall entirely out- 
side the psychological framework of dream-formation. Were it 
not for the fact that our theme is connected by just one factor 
with the theme of the development of anxiety, namely, by the 
setting free of the Ucs. during sleep, I could refrain from the dis- 
cussion of the anxiety-dream altogether, and thus avoid all the 
obscurities involved in it. 


436 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

The theory of the anxiety-dream belongs, as I have already 
repeatedly stated, to the psychology of the neuroses. I might 
further add that anxiety in dreams is an anxiety-problem and 
not a dream-problem. Having once exhibited the point of con- 
tact of the psychology of the neuroses with the theme of the 
dream-process, we have nothing further to do with it. There is 
only one thing left which I can do. Since I have asserted that 
neurotic anxiety has its origin in sexual sources, I can subject 
anxiety-dreams to analysis in order to demonstrate the sexual 
material in their dream-thoughts. 

For good reasons I refrain from citing any of the examples so 
abundantly placed at my disposal by neurotic patients, and 
prefer to give some anxiety-dreams of children. 

Personally, I have had no real anxiety-dream for decades, but 
I do recall one from my seventh or eighth year which I sub- 
jected to interpretation some thirty years later. The dream was 
very vivid, and showed me my beloved mother , with q peculiarly 
calm, sleeping countenance , carried into the room and laid on 
the bed by two (or three) persons with birds ’ beaks . I awoke 
crying and screaming, and disturbed my parents’ sleep. The 
peculiarly draped, excessively tall figures with beaks I had taken 
from the illustrations of Philippson’s Bible; I believe they rep- 
resented deities with the heads of sparrowhawks from an Egyp- 
tian tomb-relief. The analysis yielded, however, also the recol- 
lection of a house-porter’s boy, who used to play with us children 
on a meadow in front of the house; I might add that his name 
was Philip. It seemed to me then that I first heard from this boy 
the vulgar word signifying sexual intercourse, which is replaced 
among educated persons by the Latin word coitus, but which the 
dream plainly enough indicates by the choice of the birds’ 
heads. 33 1 must have guessed the sexual significance of the word 
from the look of my worldly-wise teacher. My mother’s expres- 
sion in the dream was copied from the countenance of my grand- 
father, whom I had seen a few days before his death snoring in 
a state of coma. The interpretation of the secondary elaboration 
in the dream must therefore have been that my mother was 

88 [The German of the word bird is “ Vogel f* which gives origin to the vul- 
gar expression vogeln , denoting sexual intercourse. — Trans.] 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DKEAM-PEOCESSES 437 

dying; the tam6-relief, too, agrees with this. I awoke with this 
anxiety, and could not calm myself until I had waked my par- 
ents. I remember that I suddenly became calm when I saw my 
mother; it was as though I had needed the assurance: then she 
is not dead. But this secondary interpretation of the dream had 
only taken place when the influence of the developed anxiety was 
already at work. I was not in a state of anxiety because I had 
dreamt that my mother was dying; I interpreted the dream in 
this manner in the preconscious elaboration because I was al- 
ready under the domination of the anxiety. The latter, however, 
could be traced back, through the repression to a dark, plainly 
sexual craving, which had found appropriate expression in the 
visual content of the dream. 

A man twenty-seven years of age, who had been seriously ill 
for a year, had repeatedly dreamed, between the ages of eleven 
and thirteen, dreams attended with great anxiety, to the effect 
that a man with a hatchet was running after him; he wanted to 
run away , but seemed to be paralysed , and could not move from 
the spot . This may be taken as a good and typical example of a 
very common anxiety-dream, free from any suspicion of a sexual 
meaning. In the analysis, the dreamer first thought of a story told 
him by his uncle (chronologically later than the dream), viz. 
that he was attacked at night in the street by a suspicious-looking 
individual; and he concluded from this association that he might 
have heard of a similar episode at the time of the dream. In asso- 
ciation with the hatchet, he recalled that during this period of 
his life he once hurt his hand with a hatchet while chopping wood. 
This immediately reminded him of his relations with his younger 
brother, whom he used to maltreat and knock down. He recalled, 
in particular, one occasion when he hit his brother’s head with 
his boot and made it bleed, and his mother said: “I’m afraid he 
will kill him one day.” While he seemed to be thus held by the 
theme of violence , a memory from his ninth year suddenly 
emerged. His parents had come home late and had gone to bed, 
whilst he was pretending to be asleep. He soon heard panting, 
and other sounds that seemed to him mysterious, and he could 
also guess the position of his parents in bed. His further 
thoughts showed that he had established an analogy between 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


438 

this relation between his parents and his own relation to his 
younger brother. He subsumed what was happening between his 
parents under the notion of “an act of violence and a fight . 93 The 
fact that he had frequently noticed blood in his mother’s bed 
corroborated this conception. 

That the sexual intercourse of adults appears strange and 
alarming to children who observe it, and arouses anxiety in them, 
is, I may say, a fact established by everyday experience. I have 
explained this anxiety on the ground that we have here a sexual 
excitation which is not mastered by the child’s understanding, 
and which probably also encounters repulsion because their par- 
ents are involved, and is therefore transformed into anxiety. At 
a still earlier period of life the sexual impulse towards the parent 
of opposite sex does not yet suffer repression, but as we have 
seen (pp. 84-5) expresses itself freely. 

For the night terrors with hallucinations ( pavor nocturnus) 
so frequent in children I should without hesitation offer the 
same explanation. These, too, can only be due to misunderstood 
and rejected sexual impulses which, if recorded, would probably 
show a temporal periodicity, since an intensification of sexual 
libido may equally be produced by accidentally exciting impres- 
sions and by spontaneous periodic processes of development. 

I have not the necessary observational material for the full 
demonstration of this explanation. 34 On the other hand, pedia- 
trists seem to lack the point of view which alone makes intelli- 
gible the whole series of phenomena, both from the somatic and 
from the psychic side. To illustrate by a comical example how 
closely, if one is made blind by the blinkers of medical myth- 
ology, one may pass by the understanding of such cases, I will 
cite a case which I found in a thesis on pavor nocturnus (De- 
backer, 1881, p. 66). 

A boy of thirteen, in delicate health, began to be anxious and 
dreamy; his sleep became uneasy, and once almost every week it 
was interrupted by an acute attack of anxiety with hallucina- 
tions. The memory of these dreams was always very distinct. 
Thus he was able to relate that the devil had shouted at him: 

84 This material has since been provided in abundance by the literature of 
psychoanalysis. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 439 

“Now we have you, now we have you!” and then there was a 
smell of pitch and brimstone, and the fire burned his skin. From 
this dream he woke in terror; at first he could not cry out; then 
his voice came back to him, and he was distinctly heard to say: 
“No, no, not me; I haven’t done anything,” or: “Please, don’t; 
I will never do it again!” At other times he said: “Albert has 
never done that!” Later he avoided undressing, “because the 
fire attacked him only when he was undressed.” In the midst of 
these evil dreams, which were endangering his health, he was 
sent into the country, where he recovered in the course of 
eighteen months. At the age of fifteen he confessed one day: 
“ Je n’osais pas I’avouer, mats 'feprouvais continuellement des 
picotements et des sur excitations aux parties; 35 a la fin, cela 
m’enervait tant que plusieurs fois ) y ai pense me jeter par la 
fenetre du dortoir” 

It is, of course, not difficult to guess: i. That the boy had prac- 
tised masturbation in former years, that he had probably denied 
it, and was threatened with severe punishment for his bad habit. 
(His confession: Je ne le ferai plus ; his denial: Albert ri d jamais 
fait ga.) 2. That under the advancing pressure of puberty the 
temptation to masturbate was reawakened through the titillation 
of the genitals. 3. That now, however, there arose within him a 
struggle for repression, which suppressed the libido and trans- 
formed it into anxiety, and that this anxiety now gathered up the 
punishments with which he was originally threatened. 

Let us, on the other hand, see what conclusions were drawn 
by the author (p. 69): 

“1. It is clear from this observation that the influence of 
puberty may produce in a boy of delicate health a condi- 
tion of extreme weakness, and that this may lead to a 
very marked cerebral anaemia, 36 
“2. This cerebral anaemia produces an alteration of char- 
acter, demonomaniacal hallucinations, and very violent 
nocturnal, and perhaps also diurnal, states of anxiety. 

“3. The demonomania and the self-reproaches of the boy can 

35 The emphasis is my own, though the meaning is plain enough without it« 

36 The italics are mine. 


440 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

be traced to the influences of a religious education which 
had acted upon him as a child. 

“4. All manifestations disappeared as a result of a lengthy 
sojourn in the country, bodily exercise, and the return of 
physical strength after the termination of puberty. 

“5. Possibly an influence predisposing to the development of 
the boy's cerebral state may be attributed to heredity 
and to the father's former syphilis." 

Then finally come the concluding remarks: “Nous avons fait 
entrer cette observation dans le cadre dilires apyritiques ^in- 
anition, car c’est a Vischemie ciribrale que nous rattachons cet 
6 tat particular” 

E. THE PRIMARY AND SECONDARY PROCESSES. REPRESSION 

In attempting to penetrate more profoundly into the psychology 
of the dream-processes, I have undertaken a difficult task, to 
which, indeed, my powers of exposition are hardly adequate. 
To reproduce the simultaneity of so complicated a scheme in 
terms of a successive description, and at the same time to make 
each part appear free from all assumptions, goes fairly beyond 
my powers. I have now to atone for the fact that in my exposi- 
tion of the psychology of dreams I have been unable to follow 
the historic development of my own insight. The lines of ap- 
proach to the comprehension of the dream were laid down for 
me by previous investigations into the psychology of the neu- 
roses, to which I should not refer here, although I am con- 
stantly obliged to do so; whereas I should like to work in the 
opposite direction, starting from the dream, and then proceed- 
ing to establish its junction with the psychology of the neuroses. 
I am conscious of all the difficulties which this involves for the 
reader, but I know of no way to avoid them. 

Since I am dissatisfied with this state of affairs, I am glad to 
dwell upon another point of view, which would seem to enhance 
the value of my efforts. As was shown in the introductory sec- 
tion, I found myself confronted with a theme which had been 
marked by the sharpest contradictions on the part of those who 
had written on it. In the course of our treatment of the problems 
of the dream, room has been found for most of these contradic- 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DBEAM-PROCESSES 441 

tory views. We have been compelled to take decided exception 
to two only of the views expressed: namely, that the dream is 
a meaningless process, and that it is a somatic process. Apart 
from these, we have been able to find a place for the truth of all 
the contradictory opinions at one point or another of the com- 
plicated tissue of the facts, and we have been able to show that 
each expressed something genuine and correct. That our dreams 
continue the impulses and interests of waking life has been 
generally confirmed by the discovery of the hidden dream- 
thoughts. These concern themselves only with things that seem 
to us important and of great interest. Dreams never occupy 
themselves with trifles. But we have accepted also the opposite 
view, namely, that the dream gathers up the indifferent residues 
of the day, and cannot seize upon any important interest of the 
day until it has in some measure withdrawn itself from waking 
activity. We have found that this holds true of the dream-con- 
tent, which by means of distortion gives the dream-thought an 
altered expression. We have said that the dream-process, owing 
to the nature of the mechanism of association, finds it easier to 
obtain possession of recent or indifferent material, which has 
not yet been put under an embargo by our waking mental ac- 
tivity; and that on account of the censorship it transfers the 
psychic intensity of the significant but also objectionable ma- 
terial to the indifferent. The hypermnesia of the dream and its 
ability to dispose of infantile material have become the main 
foundations of our doctrine; in our theory of dreams we have 
assigned to a wish of infantile origin the part of the indispensa- 
ble motive-power of dream-formation. It has not, of course, oc- 
curred to us to doubt the experimentally demonstrated signifi- 
cance of external sensory stimuli during sleep; but we have 
placed this material in the same relation to the dream-wish as 
the thought-residues left over from our waking activity. We 
need not dispute the fact that the dream interprets objective 
sensory stimuli after the manner of an illusion; but we have 
supplied the motive for this interpretation, which has been left 
indeterminate by other writers. The interpretation proceeds in 
such a way that the perceived object is rendered harmless as a 
source of disturbance of sleep, whilst it is made usable for the 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


442 

wish-fulfilment. Though we do not admit as a special source of 
dreams the subjective state of excitation of the sensory organs 
during sleep (which seems to have been demonstrated by Trum- 
bull Ladd), we are, nevertheless, able to explain this state of 
excitation by the regressive revival of the memories active be- 
hind the dream. As to the internal organic sensations, which are 
wont to be taken as the cardinal point of the explanation of 
dreams, these, too, find a place in our conception, though in- 
deed a more modest one. These sensations — the sensations of 
falling, of soaring, or of being inhibited — represent an ever- 
ready material, which the dream-work can employ to express 
the dream-thought as often as need arises. 

That the dream-process is a rapid and momentary one is, we 
believe, true as regards the perception by consciousness of the 
preformed dream-content; but we have found that the preced- 
ing portions of the dream-process probably follow a slow, fluc- 
tuating course. As for the riddle of the superabundant dream- 
content compressed into the briefest moment of time, we have 
been able to contribute the explanation that the dream seizes 
upon ready-made formations of the psychic life. We have found 
that it is true that dreams are distorted and mutilated by the 
memory, but that this fact presents no difficulties, as it is only 
the last manifest portion of a process of distortion which has 
been going on from the Very beginning of the dream-work. In 
the embittered controversy, which has seemed irreconcilable, 
whether the psychic life is asleep at night, or can make the same 
use of all its faculties as during the day, we have been able to 
conclude that both sides are right, but that neither is entirely 
so. In the dream-thoughts we found evidence of a highly com- 
plicated intellectual activity, operating with almost all the re- 
sources of the psychic apparatus; yet it cannot be denied that 
these dream-thoughts have originated during the day, and it is 
indispensable to assume that there is a sleeping state of the 
psychic life. Thus, even the doctrine of partial sleep received 
its due, but we have found the characteristic feature of the 
sleeping state not in the disintegration of the psychic system of 
connections, but in the special attitude adopted by the psychic 
system which is dominant during the day — the attitude of the 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 443 

wish to sleep. The deflection from the outer world retains its 
significance for our view, too; though not the only factor at 
work, it helps to make possible the regressive course of the 
dream-representation. The abandonment of voluntary guidance 
of the flow of ideas is incontestable; but psychic life does not 
thereby become aimless, for we have seen that upon relinquish- 
ment of the voluntary directing ideas, involuntary ones take 
charge. On the other hand, we have not only recognized the 
loose associative connection of the dream, but have brought a 
far greater area within the scope of this kind of connection than 
could have been suspected; we have, however, found it merely 
an enforced substitute for another, a correct and significant type 
of association. To be sure, we too have called the dream absurd, 
but examples have shown us how wise the dream is when it 
simulates absurdity. As regards the functions that have been 
attributed to the dream, we are able to accept them all. That 
the dream relieves the mind, like a safety-valve, and that, as 
Robert has put it, all kinds of harmful material are rendered 
harmless by representation in the dream, not only coincides ex- 
actly with our own theory of the twofold wish-fulfilment in the 
dream, but in its very wording becomes more intelligible for us 
than it is for Robert himself. The free indulgence of the psyche 
in the play of its faculties is reproduced in our theory as the 
non-interference of the preconscious activity with the dream. 
The “return to the embryonal standpoint of psychic life in the 
dream,” and Havelock Ellis’s remark that the dream is “an 
archaic world of vast emotions and imperfect thoughts ” appear 
to us as happy anticipations of our own exposition, which asserts 
that primitive modes of operations that are suppressed during 
the day play a part in the formation of dreams. We can fully 
identify ourselves with Sully’s statement, that “our dreams bring 
back again our earlier and successively developed personalities, 
our old ways of regarding things, with impulses and modes of 
reaction which ruled us long ago”; and for us, as for Delage, the 
suppressed material becomes the mainspring of the dream. 

We have fully accepted the role that Scherner ascribes to the 
dream-phantasy, and his own interpretations, but we have been 
obliged to transpose them, as it were, to another part of the 



444 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

problem. It is not the dream that creates the phantasy, but the 
activity of unconscious phantasy that plays the leading part in 
the formation of the dr earn- thoughts. We remain indebted to 
Schemer for directing us to the source of the dream-thoughts, 
but almost everything that he ascribes to the dream-work is 
attributable to the activity of the unconscious during the day, 
which instigates dreams no less than neurotic symptoms. The 
dream-work we had to separate from this activity as something 
quite different and far more closely controlled. Finally, we have 
by no means renounced the relation of the dream to psychic 
disturbances, but have given it, on new ground, a more solid 
foundation. 

Held together by the new features in our theory as by a su- 
perior unity, we find the most varied and most contradictory 
conclusions of other writers fitting into our structure; many of 
them are given a different turn, but only a few of them are wholly 
rejected. But our own structure is still unfinished. For apart 
from the many obscure questions in which we have involved 
ourselves by our advance into the dark regions of psychology, 
we are now, it would seem, embarrassed by a new contradiction. 
On the one hand, we have made it appear that the dream- 
thoughts proceed from perfectly normal psychic activities, but 
on the other hand we have found among the dream-thoughts a 
number of entirely abnormal mental processes, which extend 
also to the dream-content, and which we reproduce in the inter- 
pretation of the dream. All that we have termed the “dream- 
work” seems to depart so completely from the psychic processes 
which we recognize as correct and appropriate that the severest 
judgments expressed by the writers mentioned as to the low 
level of psychic achievement of dreams must appear well 
founded. 

Here, perhaps, only further investigations can provide an ex- 
planation and set us on the right path. Let me pick out for re- 
newed attention one of the constellations which lead to dream- 
formation. 

We have learned that the dream serves as a substitute for a 
number of thoughts derived from our daily life, and which fit 
together with perfect logic. We cannot, therefore, doubt that 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 445 

these thoughts have their own origin in our normal mental life. 
All the qualities which we value in our thought-processes, and 
which mark them out as complicated performances of a high 
order, we shall find repeated in the dream-thoughts. There is, 
however, no need to assume that this mental work is performed 
during sleep; such an assumption would badly confuse the con- 
ception of the psychic state of sleep to which we have hitherto 
adhered. On the contrary, these thoughts may very well have 
their origin in the daytime, and, unremarked by our conscious- 
ness, may have gone on from their first stimulus until, at the 
onset of sleep, they have reached completion. If we are to con- 
clude anything from this state of affairs, it can only be that it 
proves that the most complex mental operations are possible 
without the cooperation of consciousness — a truth which we 
have had to learn anyhow from every psychoanalysis of a pa- 
tient suffering from hysteria or obsessions. These dream- 
thoughts are certainly not in themselves incapable of conscious- 
ness; if we have not become conscious of them during the day, 
this may have been due to various reasons. The act of becoming 
conscious depends upon a definite psychic function — attention 
— being brought to bear. This seems to be available only in a 
determinate quantity, which may have been diverted from the 
train of thought in question by other aims. Another way in 
which such trains of thought may be withheld from conscious- 
ness is the following: From our conscious reflection we know 
that, when applying our attention, we follow a particular course. 
But if that course leads us to an idea which cannot withstand 
criticism, we break off and allow the cathexis of attention to 
drop. Now, it would seem that the train of thought thus started 
and abandoned may continue to develop without our attention 
returning to it, unless at some point it attains a specially high 
intensity which compels attention. An initial conscious rejec- 
tion by our judgment, on the ground of incorrectness or use- 
lessness for the immediate purpose of the act of thought, may, 
therefore, be the cause of a thought-process going on unnoticed 
by consciousness until the onset of sleep. 

Let us now recapitulate: We call such a train of thought a pre~ 
conscious train, and we believe it to be perfectly correct, and 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


446 

that it may equally well be a merely neglected train or one that 
has been interrupted and suppressed. Let us also state in plain 
terms how we visualize the movement of our thought. We be- 
lieve that a certain quantity of excitation, which we call “cathec- 
tic energy,” is displaced from a purposive idea along the asso- 
ciation paths selected by this directing idea. A “neglected” train 
of thought has received no such cathexis, and the cathexis has 
been withdrawn from one that was “suppressed” “or rejected”; 
both have thus been left to their own excitations. The train of 
thought cathected by some aim becomes able under certain con- 
ditions to attract the attention of consciousness, and by the 
mediation of consciousness it then receives “hyper cathexis” We 
shall be obliged presently to elucidate our assumptions as to the 
nature and function of consciousness. 

A train of thought thus incited in the Pcs . may either dis- 
appear spontaneously, or it may continue. The former eventu- 
ality we conceive as follows: it diffuses its energy through all 
the association paths emanating from it, and throws the entire 
chain of thoughts into a state of excitation, which continues for 
a while, and then subsides, through the excitation which had 
called for discharge being transformed into dormant cathexis. 
If this first eventuality occurs, the process has no further sig- 
nificance for dream-formation. But other directing ideas are 
lurking in our preconscious, which have their source in our un- 
conscious and ever-active wishes. These may gain control of the 
excitation in the circle of thoughts thus left to itself, establish 
a connection between it and the unconscious wish, and transfer 
to it the energy inherent in the unconscious wish. Henceforth 
the neglected or suppressed train of thought is in a position to 
maintain itself, although this reinforcement gives it no claim to 
access to consciousness. We may say, then, that the hitherto pre- 
conscious train of thought has been drawn into the unconscious . 

Other constellations leading to dream-formation might be as 
follows: The preconscious train of thought might have been 
connected from the beginning with the unconscious wish, and 
for that reason might have met with rejection by the dominating 
aim-cathexis. Or an unconscious wish might become active for 
other (possibly somatic) reasons, and of its own accord seek a 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PEOCESSES 447 

transference to the psychic residues not cathected by the Pcs . 
All three cases have the same result: there is established in the 
preconscious a train of thought which, having been abandoned 
by the preconscious cathexis, has acquired cathexis from the 
unconscious wish. 

From this point onward the train of thought is subjected to a 
series of transformations which we no longer recognize as nor- 
mal psychic processes, and which give a result that we find 
strange, a psychopathological formation. Let us now emphasize 
and bring together these transformations: — 

1. The intensities of the individual ideas become capable of 
discharge in their entirety, and pass from one idea to another, 
so that individual ideas are formed which are endowed with 
great intensity. Through the repeated occurrence of this process, 
the intensity of an entire train of thought may ultimately be 
concentrated in a single conceptual unit. This is the fact of com- 
pression or condensation with which we became acquainted 
when investigating the dream-work. It is condensation that is 
mainly responsible for the strange impression produced by 
dreams, for we know of nothing analogous to it in the normal 
psychic life that is accessible to consciousness. We get here, too, 
ideas which are of great psychic significance as nodal points or 
as end-results of whole chains of thought, but this value is not 
expressed by any character actually manifest for our internal 
perception; what is represented in it is not in any way made 
more intensive. In the process of condensation the whole set of 
psychic connections becomes transformed into the intensity of 
the idea-content. The situation is the same as when in the case 
of a book I italicize or print in heavy type any word to which I 
attach outstanding value for the understanding of the text. In 
speech I should pronounce the same word loudly and deliber- 
ately and with emphasis. The first simile points immediately to 
one of the examples which were given of the dream-work (tri- 
methylamine in the dream of Irma’s injection). Historians of 
art call our attention to the fact that the most ancient sculp- 
tures known to history follow a similar principle, in expressing 
the rank of the persons represented by the size of the statues. 
The king is made two or three times as tall as his retinue or his 



448 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

vanquished enemies. But a work of art of the Roman period 
makes use of more subtle means to accomplish the same end. 
The figure of the Emperor is placed in the center, erect and in 
his full height, and special care is bestowed on the modelling of 
this figure; his enemies are seen cowering at his feet; but he is 
no longer made to seem a giant among dwarfs. At the same time, 
in the bowing of the subordinate to his superior, even in our 
own day, we have an echo of this ancient principle of repre- 
sentation. 

The direction followed by the condensations of the dream is 
prescribed on the one hand by the true preconscious relations of 
the dream-thoughts, and on the other hand by the attraction of 
the visual memories in the unconscious. The success of the con- 
densation-work produces those intensities which are required for 
penetration to the perception-system. 

2. By the free transference of intensities, and in the service of 
the condensation, intermediary ideas — compromises, as it were 
■ — are formed (cf. the numerous examples). This, also, is some- 
thing unhead of in the normal movement of our ideas, where 
what is of most importance is the selection and the retention of 
the right conceptual material. On the other hand, composite and 
compromise formations occur with extraordinary frequency 
when we are trying to find verbal expression for preconscious 
thoughts; these are considered “slips of the tongue.” 

3. The ideas which transfer their intensities to one another 
are very loosely connected , and are joined together by such forms 
of association as are disdained by our serious thinking, and left 
to be exploited solely by wit. In particular, assonances and pun- 
ning associations are treated as equal in value to any other as- 
sociations. 

4. Contradictory thoughts do not try to eliminate one another, 
but continue side by side, and often combine to form conden- 
sation-products, as though no contradiction existed; or they 
form compromises for which we should never forgive our 
thought, but which we frequently sanction in our action. 

These are some of the most conspicuous abnormal processes 
to which the dream-thoughts which have previously been ra- 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 449 

tionally formed are subjected in the course of the dream-work. 
As the main feature of these processes, we may see that the 
greatest importance is attached to rendering the cathecting en- 
ergy mobile and capable of discharge; the content and the in- 
trinsic significance of the psychic elements to which these 
cathexes adhere become matters of secondary importance. One 
might perhaps assume that condensation and compromise-forma- 
tion are effected only in the service of regression, when the oc- 
casion arises for changing thoughts into images. But the analysis 
— and still more plainly the synthesis — of such dreams as show 
no regression towards images, e.g. the dream “Autodidasker: 
Conversation with Professor N.,” reveals the same processes of 
displacement and condensation as do the rest. 

We cannot, therefore, avoid the conclusion that two kinds of 
essentially different psychic processes participate in dream- 
formation; one forms perfectly correct and fitting dream- 
thoughts, equivalent to the results of normal thinking, while the 
other deals with these thoughts in a most astonishing and, as it 
seems, incorrect way. The latter process we have already set 
apart in Chapter VI as the dream-work proper. What can we 
say now as to the derivation of this psychic process? 

It would be impossible to answer this question here if we had 
not penetrated a considerable way into the psychology of the 
neuroses, and especially of hysteria. From this, however, we 
learn that the same “incorrect” psychic processes — as well as 
others not enumerated — control the production of hysterical 
symptoms. In hysteria, too, we find at first a series of perfectly 
correct and fitting thoughts, equivalent to our conscious ones, 
of whose existence in this form we can, however, learn nothing, 
i.e. which we can only subsequently reconstruct. If they have 
forced their way anywhere to perception, we discover from the 
analysis of the symptom formed that these normal thoughts have 
been subjected to abnormal treatment, and that by means of 
condensation and compromise- formation , through superficial as- 
sociations which cover up contradictions, and eventually along 
the path of regression, they have been conveyed into the symp- 
tom, In view of the complete identity between the peculiarities of 



450 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

the dream-work and those of the psychic activity which issues 
in psychoneurotic symptoms, we shall feel justified in transfer- 
ring to the dream the conclusions urged upon us by hysteria. 

From the theory of hysteria we borrow the proposition that 
such an abnormal psychic elaboration of a normal train of 
thought takes place only when the latter has been used for the 
transference of an unconscious wish which dates from the in- 
fantile life and is in a state of repression . Complying with this 
proposition, we have built up the theory of the dream on the 
assumption that the actuating dream-wish invariably originates 
in the unconscious; which, as we have ourselves admitted, cannot 
be universally demonstrated, even though it cannot be refuted. 
But in order to enable us to say just what repression is, after 
employing this term so freely, we shall be obliged to make a 
further addition to our psychological scaffolding. 

We had elaborated the fiction of a primitive psychic ap- 
paratus, the work of which is regulated by the effort to avoid 
accumulation of excitation, and as far as possible to maintain 
itself free from excitation. For this reason it was constructed after 
the plan of a reflex apparatus; motility, in the first place as the 
path to changes within the body, was the channel of discharge 
at its disposal. We then discussed the psychic results of experi- 
ences of gratification, and were able at this point to introduce a 
second assumption, namely, that the accumulation of excitation 
— by processes that do not concern us here — is felt as pain, and 
sets the apparatus in operation in order to bring about again a 
state of gratification, in which the diminution of excitation is 
perceived as pleasure. Such a current in the apparatus, issuing 
from pain and striving for pleasure, we call a wish. We have said 
that nothing but a wish is capable of setting the apparatus in 
motion and that the course of any excitation in the apparatus is 
regulated automatically by the perception of pleasure and pain. 
The first occurrence of wishing may well have taken the form of 
a hallucinatory cathexis of the memory of gratification. But this 
hallucination, unless it could be maintained to the point of ex- 
haustion, proved incapable of bringing about a cessation of the 
need, and consequently of securing the pleasure connected with 
gratification. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DSEAM-PROCESbES 451 

Thus, there was required a second activity — in our terminol- 
ogy the activity of a second system— which would not allow the 
memory-cathexis to force its way to perception and thence to 
bind the psychic forces, but would lead the excitation emanating 
from the need-stimulus by a detour, which by means of volun- 
tary motility would ultimately so change the outer world as to 
permit the real perception of the gratifying object. Thus far we 
have already elaborated the scheme of the psychic apparatus; 
these two systems are the germ of what we set up in the fully 
developed apparatus as the Ucs. and the Pcs. 

To change the outer world appropriately by means of motility 
requires the accumulation of a large total of experiences in the 
memory-systems, as well as a manifold consolidation of the rela- 
tions which are evoked in this memory-material by various di- 
recting ideas. We will now proceed further with our assumptions. 
The activity of the second system, groping in many directions, 
tentatively sending forth cathexes and retracting them, needs 
on the one hand full command over all memory-material, but 
on the other hand it would be a superfluous expenditure of en- 
ergy were it to send along the individual thought-paths large 
quantities of cathexis, which would then flow away to no purpose 
and thus diminish the quantity needed for changing the outer 
world. Out of a regard for purposiveness, therefore, I postulate 
that the second system succeeds in maintaining the greater part 
of the energic cathexes in a state of rest, and in using only a 
small portion for its operations of displacement. The mechanics 
of these processes is entirely unknown to me; anyone who seri- 
ously wishes to follow up these ideas must address himself to 
the physical analogies, and find some way of getting a picture 
of the sequence of motions which ensues on the excitation of the 
neurones. Here I do no more than hold fast to the idea that the 
activity of the first ^-system aims at the free outflow of the 
quantities of excitation, and that the second system, by means 
of the cathexes emanating from it, effects an inhibition of this 
outflow, a transformation into dormant cathexis, probably with 
a rise of potential. I therefore assume that the course taken by 
any excitation under the control of the second system is bound 
to quite different mechanical conditions from those which obtain 



452 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

under the control of the first system. After the second system has 
completed its work of experimental thought, it removes the in- 
hibition and damming up of the excitations and allows them to 
flow off into motility. 

An interesting train of thought now presents itself if we con- 
sider the relations of this inhibition of discharge by the second 
system to the process of regulation by the pain-principle. Let us 
now seek out the counterpart of the primary experience of 
gratification, namely, the objective experience of fear . Let a 
perception-stimulus act on the primitive apparatus and be the 
source of a pain-excitation. There will then ensue uncoordinated 
motor manifestations, which will go on until one of these with- 
draws the apparatus from perception, and at the same time from 
the pain. On the reappearance of the percept this manifestation 
will immediately be repeated (perhaps as a movement of flight), 
until the percept has again disappeared. But in this case no 
tendency will remain to recathect the perception of the source 
of pain by hallucination or otherwise. On the contrary, there 
will be a tendency in the primary apparatus to turn away again 
from this painful memory-image immediately if it is in any way 
awakened, since the overflow of its excitation into perception 
would, of course, evoke (or more precisely, begin to evoke) pain. 
This turning away from a recollection, which is merely a repeti- 
tion of the former flight from perception, is also facilitated by 
the fact that, unlike the perception, the recollection has not 
enough quality to arouse consciousness, and thereby to attract 
fresh cathexis. This effortless and regular turning away of the 
psychic process from the memory of anything that had once 
been painful gives us the prototype and the first example of 
psychic repression . We all know how much of this turning away 
from the painful, the tactics of the ostrich, may still be shown 
as present even in the normal psychic life of adults. 

In obedience to the pain-principle, therefore, the first ^-sys- 
tem is quite incapable of introducing anything unpleasant into 
the thbught-nexus. The system cannot do anything but wish. If 
this were to remain so, the activity of thought of the second sys- 
tem, which needs to have at its disposal all the memories stored 
up by experience, would be obstructed. But two paths are now 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OE THE DREAM-PROCESSES 453 

open: either the work of the second system frees itself com- 
pletely from the pain-principle, and continues its course, paying 
no heed to the pain attached to given memories, or it contrives 
to cathect the memory of the pain in such a manner as to preclude 
the liberation of pain. We can reject the first possibility, as the 
pain-principle also proves to act as a regulator of the cycle of 
excitation in the second system; we are therefore thrown back 
upon the second possibility, namely, that this system cathects a 
memory in such a manner as to inhibit any outflow of excita- 
tion from it, and hence, also, the outflow, comparable to a motor- 
innervation, needed for the development of pain. And thus, 
setting out from two different starting-points, i.e. from regard 
for the pain-principle, and from the principle of the least ex- 
penditure of innervation, we are led to the hypothesis that 
cathexis through the second system is at the same time an in- 
hibition of the discharge of excitation. Let us, however, keep a 
close hold on the fact — for this is the key to the theory of re- 
pression — that the second system can only cathect an idea when 
it is in a position to inhibit any pain emanating from this idea . 
Anything that withdrew itself from this inhibition would also 
remain inaccessible for the second system, i.e. would immedi- 
ately be given up by virtue of the pain-principle. The inhibition 
of pain, however, need not be complete; it must be permitted 
to begin, since this indicates to the second system the nature of 
the memory, and possibly its lack of fitness for the purpose 
sought by the process of thought. 

The psychic process which is alone tolerated by the first sys- 
tem I shall now call the primary process; and that which results 
under the inhibiting action of the second system I shall call the 
secondary process . I can also show at another point for what 
purpose the second system is obliged to correct the primary 
process. The primary process strives for discharge of the ex- 
citation in order to establish with the quantity of excitation thus 
collected an identity of perception; the secondary process has 
abandoned this intention, and has adopted instead the aim of 
an identity of thought . All thinking is merely a detour from the 
memory of gratification (taken as a purposive idea) to the 
identical cathexis of the same memory, which is to be reached 



THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 


454 

once more by the path of motor experiences. Thought must 
concern itself with the connecting-paths between ideas without 
allowing itself to be misled by their intensities. But it is ob- 
vious that condensations of ideas and intermediate or com- 
promise-formations are obstacles to the attainment of the 
identity which is aimed at; by substituting one idea for another 
they swerve away from the path which would have led onward 
from the first idea. Such procedures are, therefore, carefully 
avoided in our secondary thinking. It will readily be seen, more- 
over, that the pain-principle, although at other times it provides 
the thought-process with its most important clues, may also put 
difficulties in its way in the pursuit of indentity of thought. 
Hence, the tendency of the thinking process must always be to 
free itself more and more from exclusive regulation by lie pain- 
principle, and to restrict the development of affect through the 
work of thought to the very minimum which remains effective 
as a signal. This refinement in functioning is to be achieved by a 
fresh hyper-cathexis, effected with the help of consciousness. 
But we are aware that this refinement is seldom completely suc- 
cessful, even in normal psychic life, and that our thinking always 
remains liable to falsification by the intervention of the pain- 
principle. 

This, however, is not the breach in the functional efficiency of 
our psychic apparatus which makes it possible for thoughts rep- 
resenting the result of the secondary thought-work to fall into 
the power of the primary psychic process; by which formula we 
may now describe the operations resulting in dreams and the 
symptoms of hysteria. This inadequacy results from the con- 
verging of two factors in our development, one of which pertains 
solely to the psychic apparatus, and has exercised a determining 
influence on the relation of the two systems, while the other 
operates fluctuatingly, and introduces motive forces of organic 
origin into the psychic life. Both originate in the infantile life, 
and are a precipitate of the alteration which our psychic and 
somatic organism has undergone since our infantile years. 

When I termed one of the psychic processes in the psychic 
apparatus the primary process, I did so not only in consideration 
of its status and function, but was also able to take account of 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OP THE DREAM-PROCESSES 455 

the temporal relationship actually involved. So far as we know, 
a psychic apparatus possessing only the primary process does 
not exist, and is to that extent a theoretical fiction; but this at 
least is a fact: that the primary processes are present in the 
apparatus from the beginning, while the secondary processes 
only take shape gradually during the course of life, inhibiting 
and overlaying the primary, whilst gaining complete control 
over them perhaps only in the prime of life. Owing to this belated 
arrival of the secondary processes, the essence of our being, con- 
sisting of unconscious wish-impulses, remains something which 
cannot be grasped or inhibited by thepreconscious; and its part 
is once and for all restricted to indicating the most appropriate 
paths for the wish-impulses originating in the unconscious. These 
unconscious wishes represent for all subsequent psychic striv- 
ings a compulsion to which they must submit themselves, al- 
though they may perhaps endeavour to divert them and to guide 
them to superior aims. In consequence of this retardation, an 
extensive region of the memory-material remains in fact inac- 
cessible to preconscious cathexis. 

Now among these wish-impulses originating in the infantile 
life, indestructible and incapable of inhibition, there are some 
the fulfilments of which have come to be In contradiction with 
the purposive ideas of our secondary thinking. The fulfilment 
of these wishes would no longer produce an affect of pleasure, 
but one of pain; and it is just this conversion of affect that con- 
stitutes the essence of what we call repression ” In what man- 
ner and by what motive forces such a conversion can take place 
constitutes the problem of repression, which we need here only 
touch upon in passing. It will suffice to note the fact that such a 
conversion of affect occurs in the course of development (one 
need only think of the emergence of disgust, originally absent 
in infantile life), and that it is connected with the activity of 
the secondary system. The memories from which the uncon- 
scious wish evokes a liberation of affect have never been ac- 
cessible to the Pcs., and for that reason this liberation cannot 
be inhibited. It is precisely on account of this generation of 
affect that these ideas are not now accessible even by way of 
the preconscious thoughts to which they have transferred the 



456 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

energy of the wishes connected with them. On the contrary, the 
pain-principle comes into play, and causes the Pcs. to turn away 
from these transference-thoughts. These latter are left to them- 
selves, are “repressed,” and thus the existence of a store of 
infantile memories, withdrawn from the beginning from the Pcs., 
becomes the preliminary condition of repression. 

In the most favourable case, the generation of pain terminates 
so soon as the cathexis is withdrawn from the transference- 
thoughts in the Pcs., and this result shows that the intervention 
of the pain-principle is appropriate. It is otherwise, however, if 
the repressed unconscious wish receives an organic reinforce- 
ment which it can put at the service of its transference-thoughts, 
and by which it can enable them to attempt to break through 
with their excitation, even if the cathexis of the Pcs. has been 
taken away from them. A defensive struggle then ensues, inas- 
much as the Pcs. reinforces the opposite to the repressed thoughts 
(counter-cathexis), and the eventual outcome is that the trans- 
ference-thoughts (the carriers of the unconscious wish) break 
through in some form of compromise through symptom-forma- 
tion. But from the moment that the repressed thoughts are pow- 
erfully cathected by the unconscious wish-impulse, but forsaken 
by the preconscious cathexis, they succumb to the primary 
psychic process, and aim only at motor discharge; or, if the way 
is dear, at hallucinatory revival of the desired identity of per- 
ception. We have already found, empirically, that the “incorrect” 
processes described are enacted only with thoughts which are in 
a state of repression. We are now in a position to grasp yet an- 
other part of the total scheme of the facts. These “incorrect” 
processes are the primary processes of the psychic apparatus; 
they occur wherever ideas abandoned by the preconscious cath- 
exis are left to themselves and can become filled with the unin- 
hibited energy which flows from the unconscious and strives for 
discharge. There are further facts which go to show that the 
processes described as “incorrect” are not really falsifications of 
our normal procedure, or defective thinking, but the modes of 
operation of the psychic apparatus when freed from inhibition. 
Thus we see that the process of conveyance of the preconscious 
excitation to motility occurs in accordance with the same pro- 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 457 

cedure, and that in the linkage of preconscious ideas with words 
we may easily find manifested the same displacements and con- 
fusions (which we ascribe to inattention). Finally, a proof of 
the increased work made necessary by the inhibition of these 
primary modes of procedure might be found in the fact that we 
achieve a comical effect , a surplus to be discharged through 
laughter , if we allow these modes of thought to come to con- 
sciousness. 

The theory of the psychoneuroses asserts with absolute cer- 
tainty that it can only be sexual wish-impulses from the infantile 
life, which have undergone repression (affect-conversion) during 
the developmental period of childhood, which are capable of 
renewal at later periods of development (whether as a result of 
our sexual constitution, which has, of course, grown out of an 
original bisexuality, or in consequence of unfavourable influ- 
ences in our sexual life) ; and which therefore supply the motive- 
power for all psychoneurotic symptom-formation. It is only by 
the introduction of these sexual forces that the gaps still demon- 
strable in the theory of repression can be filled. Here, I will leave 
it undecided whether the postulate of the sexual and infantile 
holds good for the theory of dreams as well; I am not completing 
the latter, because in assuming that the dream-wish invariably 
originates in the unconscious I have already gone a step beyond 
the demonstrable . 37 Nor will I inquire further into the nature 
87 Here, as elsewhere, there are gaps in the treatment of the subject, which 
I have deliberately left, because to fill them up would, on the one hand, re- 
quire excessive labour, and, on the other hand, I should have to depend on 
material which is foreign to the dream. Thus, for example, I have avoided 
stating whether I give the word “suppressed” a different meaning from that 
of the word “repressed.” No doubt, however, it will have become clear that 
the latter emphasizes more than the former the relation to the unconscious. 
I have not gone into the problem which obviously arises, of why the dream- 
thoughts undergo distortion by the censorship even when they abandon the 
progressive path to consciousness, and choose the path of regression. And 
so with other similar omissions. I have, above all, sought to give some idea 
of the problems to which the further dissection of the dream-work leads, 
and to indicate the other themes with which these are connected. It was, 
however, not always easy to decide just where the pursuit should be dis- 
continued.— That I have not treated exhaustively the part which the 
psycho-sexual life plays in the dream, and have avoided the interpretation 
of dreams of an obviously sexual content, is due to a special reason — which 



458 THE INTERPRETATION OE DREAMS 

of the difference between the play of psychic forces in dream- 
formation and in the formation of hysterical symptoms, since 
there is missing here the needed fuller knowledge of one of the 
two things to be compared. But there is another point which I 
regard as important, and I will confess at once that it was only 
on account of this point that I entered upon all the discussions 
concerning the two psychic systems, their modes of operation, 
and the fact of repression. It does not greatly matter whether I 
have conceived the psychological relations at issue with’ ap- 
proximate correctness, or, as is easily possible in such a difficult 
matter, wrongly and imperfectly. However our views may change 
about the interpretation of the psychic censorship or the correct 
and the abnormal elaboration of the dream-content, it remains 
certain that such processes are active in dream-formation, and 
that in their essentials they reveal the closest analogy with the 
processes observed in the formation of hysterical symptoms. 
Now the dream is not a pathological phenomenon; it does not 
presuppose any disturbance of our psychic equilibrium; and it 
does not leave behind it any weakening of our efficiency or 
capacities. The objection that no conclusions can be drawn about 
the dreams of healthy persons from my own dreams and from 
those of my neurotic patients may be rejected without com- 
ment. If, then, from the nature of the given phenomena we infer 
the nature of their motive forces, we find that the psychic 
mechanism utilized by the neuroses is not newly-created by a 
morbid disturbance that lays hold of the psychic life, but lies 
in readiness in the normal structure of our psychic apparatus. 


may not perhaps be that which the reader would expect. It is absolutely 
alien to my views and my neuropathological doctrines to regard the sex- 
ual life as a pudendum with which neither the physician nor the scientific 
investigator should concern himself. To me, the moral indigation which 
prompted the translator of Artemidorus of Daldis to keep from the reader’s 
knowledge the chapter on sexual dreams contained in the Symbolism of 
Dreams is merely ludicrous. For my own part, what decided my procedure 
was solely the knowledge that in the explanation of sexual dreams X should 
be bound to get deeply involved in the stiU unexplained problems of per- 
version and bisexuality; it was for this reason that I reserved this material 
for treatment elsewhere. 



THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 459 

The two psychic systems, the frontier-censorship between them, 
the inhibition and overlaying of the one activity by the other, 
the relations of both to consciousness — or whatever may take 
the place of these concepts on a juster interpretation of the actual 
relations — all these belong to the normal structure of our psychic 
instrument, and the dream shows us one of the paths which lead 
to a knowledge of this structure. If we wish to be content with 
a minimum of perfectly assured additions to our knowledge, we 
shall say that the dream affords proof that the suppressed ma- 
terial continues to exist even in the normal person and remains 
capable of psychic activity . Dreams are one of the manifestations 
of this suppressed material; theoretically, this is true in all cases; 
and in tangible experience, it has been found true in at least a 
great number of cases, which happen to display most plainly 
the more striking* features of the dream-life. The suppressed 
psychic material, which in the waking state has been prevented 
from expression and cut off from internal perception by the 
mutual neutralization of contradictory attitudes , finds ways and 
means, under the sway of compromise-formations, of obtruding 
itself on consciousness during the night. 

Flectere si nequeo Superos , Acheronta movebo . 

At any rate, the interpretation of dreams is the via regia to a 
knowledge of the unconscious element in our psychic life . 

By the analysis of dreams we obtain some insight into the 
composition of this most marvellous and most mysterious of in- 
struments; it is true that this only takes us a little way, but it 
gives us a start which enables us, setting out from the angle of 
other (properly pathological) formations, to penetrate further 
in our disjoining of the instrument. For disease — at all events 
that which is rightly called functional — does not necessarily pre- 
suppose the destruction of this apparatus, or the establishment 
of new cleavages in its interior; it can be explained dynamically 
by the strengthening and weakening of the components of the 
play of forces, so many of the activities of which are covered 
up in normal functioning. It might be shown elsewhere how the 
fact that the apparatus is a combination of two instances also 


4 60 THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 

permits of a refinement of its normal functioning which would 
have been impossible to a? single system . 38 

P. THE UNCONSCIOUS AND CONSCIOUSNESS. REALITY 

If we look more closely, we may observe that the psychological 
considerations examined in the foregoing chapter require us to 
assume, not the existence of two systems near the motor end of 
the psychic apparatus, but two kinds of processes or courses 
taken by excitation . But this does not disturb us; for we must 
always be ready to drop our auxiliary ideas, when we think we 
are in a position to replace them by something which comes 
closer to the unknown reality. Let us now try to correct certain 
views which may have taken a misconceived form as long as 
we regarded the two systems, in the crudest and most obvious 
sense, as two localities within the psychic apparatus — views 
which have left a precipitate in the terms “repression 5 ’ and 
“penetration.” Thus, when we say that an unconscious thought 
strives for translation into the preconscious in order subse- 
quently to penetrate through to consciousness, we do not mean 
that a second idea has to be formed, in a new locality, like a 
paraphrase, as it were, whilst the original persists by its side; 
and similarly, when we speak of penetration into consciousness, 
we wish carefully to detach from this notion any idea of a change 
of locality. When we say that a preconscious idea is repressed 
and subsequently absorbed by the unconscious, we might be 
tempted by these images, borrowed from the idea of a struggle 
for a particular territory, to assume that an arrangement is 
really broken up in the one psychic locality and replaced by a new 
one in the other locality. For these comparisons we will sub- 
stitute a description which would seem to correspond more 
closely to the real state of affairs; we will say that an energic 

88 The dream is not the only phenomenon that permits us to base our 
psychopathology on psychology. In a short unfinished series of articles in 
the M onatsschrift fur Psychiatrie und Neurologic ( Vber den psychiscken 
Mechanismus der Vergesslichkeit, 1898, and Vber Deckerinnerungen, 1899) 
I attempted to interpret a number of psychic manifestations from everyday 
life in support of the same conception. (These and other articles on “For- 
getting,” “Lapses of Speech, 1 M etc., have now been published in the Psycho- 
pathology of Everyday Life,) 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 461 

cathexis is shifted to or withdrawn from a certain arrangement, 
so that the psychic formation falls under the domination of a 
given instance or is withdrawn from it. Here again we replace 
a topographical mode of representation by a dynamic one; it is 
not the psychic formation that appears to us as the mobile ele- 
ment, but its innervation . 39 

Nevertheless, I think it expedient and justifiable to continue 
to use the illustrative idea of the two systems. We shall avoid 
any abuse of this mode of representation if we remember that 
ideas, thoughts, and psychic formations in general must not in 
any case be localized in organic elements of the nervous system 
but, so to speak, between them , where resistances and associa- 
tion-tracks form the correlate corresponding to them. Every- 
thing that can become an object of internal perception is virtual, 
like the image in the telescope produced by the crossing of light- 
rays. But we are justified in thinking of the systems — which have 
nothing psychic in themselves, and which never become acces- 
sible to our psychic perception — as something similar to the 
lenses of the telescope, which project the image. If we continue 
this comparison, we might say that the censorship between the 
two systems corresponds to the refraction of rays on passing 
into a new medium. 

Thus far, we have developed our psychology on our own re- 
sponsibility; it is now time to turn and look at the doctrines 
prevailing in modern psychology, and to examine the relation 
of these to our theories. The problem of the unconscious in 
psychology is, according to the forcible statement of Lipps , 40 
less a psychological problem than the problem of psychology. As 
long as psychology disposed of this problem by the verbal ex- 
planation that the “psychic” is the “conscious,” and that “un- 
conscious psychic occurrences” are an obvious contradiction, 
there was no possibility of a physician’s observations of abnormal 
mental states being turned to any psychological account. The 

39 This conception underwent elaboration and modification when it was 
recognized that the essential character of a preconsdous idea was its con- 
nection with the residues of verbal ideas (The Unconsdous, Collected 
Papers , vol. iv, p. 98) . 

40 Der Begriff des Unbewussten in der Psychologies Lecture delivered at the 
Third International Psychological Congress at Munich, 



462 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

physician and the philosopher can meet only when both acknowl- 
edge that “unconscious psychic processes” is “the appropriate 
and justified expression for an established fact.” The physician 
cannot but reject, with a shrug of his shoulders, the assertion that 
“consciousness is the indispensable quality of the psychic”; if 
his respect for the utterances of the philosophers is still great 
enough, he may perhaps assume that he and they do not deal 
with the same thing and do not pursue the same science. For a 
single intelligent observation of the psychic life of a neurotic, 
a single analysis of a dream, must force upon him the unshakable 
conviction that the most complicated and the most accurate 
operations of thought, to which the name of psychic occurrences 
can surely not be refused, may take place without arousing 
consciousness . 41 The physician, it is true, does not learn of these 
unconscious processes until they have produced an effect on 
consciousness which admits of communication or observation. 
But this effect on consciousness may show a psychic character 
which differs completely from the unconscious process, so that 
internal perception cannot possibly recognize in the first a sub- 
stitute for the second. The physician must reserve himself the 
right to penetrate, by a process of deduction , from the effect on 
consciousness to the unconscious psychic process; he learns in 
this way that the effect on consciousness is only a remote psychic 
product of the unconscious process, and that the latter has not 
become conscious as such, and has, moreover, existed and op- 
erated without in any way betraying itself to consciousness. 

A return from the over-estimation of the property of con- 
sciousness is the indispensable preliminary to any genuine in- 
sight into the course of psychic events. As Lipps has said, the 
41 1 am happy to be able to point to an author who has drawn from the 
study of dreams the same conclusion as regards the relation between con- 
sciousness and the unconscious. 

Du Prel says: “The problem: what is the psyche, manifestly requires a 
preliminary examination as to whether consciousness and psyche are iden- 
tical. But it is just this preliminary question which is answered in the nega- 
tive by the dream, which shows that the concept of the psyche extends 
beyond that of consciousness, much as the gravitational force of a star 
extends beyond its sphere of luminosity’ 7 ( Philos . d. Mystik, p. 47). 

“It is a truth which cannot be sufficiently emphasized that the concepts 
of consciousness and of the psyche are not co-extensive” (p. 306). 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 463 

unconscious must be accepted as the general basis of the psychic 
life. The unconscious is the larger circle which includes the smaller 
circle of the conscious; everything conscious has a preliminary un- 
conscious stage, whereas the unconscious can stop at this stage, 
and yet claim to be considered a full psychic function. The un- 
conscious is the true psychic reality; in its inner nature it is just 
as much unknown tons as the reality of the external world , and 
it is just as imperfectly communicated to us by the data of con- 
sciousness as is the external world by the reports of our sense- 
organs . 

We get rid of a series of dream-problems which have claimed 
much attention from earlier writers on the subject when the old 
antithesis between conscious life and dream-life is discarded, 
and the unconscious psychic assigned to its proper place. Thus, 
many of the achievements which are a matter for wonder in a 
dream are now no longer to be attributed to dreaming, but to 
unconscious thinking, which is active also during the day. If the 
dream seems to make play with a symbolical representation of 
the body, as Schemer has said, we know that this is the work 
of certain unconscious phantasies, which are probably under 
the sway of sexual impulses and find expression not only in 
dreams, but also in hysterical phobias and other symptoms. If 
the dream continues and completes mental work begun during 
the day, and even brings valuable new ideas to light, we have 
only to strip off the dream-disguise from this, as the contribu- 
tion of the dream-work, and a mark of the assistance of dark 
powers in the depths of the psyche (cf. the devil in Tartini’s 
sonata-dream). The intellectual achievement as such belongs to 
the same psychic forces as are responsible for all such achieve- 
ments during the day. We are probably much too inclined to 
overestimate the conscious character even of intellectual and 
artistic production. From the reports of certain writers who have 
been highly productive, such as Goethe and Helmholtz, we learn, 
rather, that the most essential and original part of their creations 
came to them in the form of inspirations, and offered itself to 
their awareness in an almost completed state. In other cases, 
where there is a concerted effort of all the psychic forces, there 
is nothing strange in the fact that conscious activity, too, lends 


464 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

its aid. But it is the much-abused privilege of conscious activity 
to hide from us all other activities wherever it participates. 

It hardly seems worth while to take up the historical signifi- 
cance of dreams as a separate theme. Where, for instance, a 
leader has been impelled by a dream to engage in a bold under- 
taking, the success of which has had the effect of changing his- 
tory, a new problem arises only so long as the dream is regarded 
as a mysterious power and contrasted with other more familiar 
psychic forces. The problem disappears as soon as we regard the 
dream as a form of expression for impulses to which a resistance 
was attached during the day, whilst at night they were able to 
draw reinforcement from deep-lying sources of excitation . 42 But 
the great respect with which the ancient peoples regarded dreams 
is based on a just piece of psychological divination. It is a 
homage paid to the unsubdued and indestructible element in the 
human soul, to the daemonic power which furnishes the dream- 
wish, and which we have found again in our unconscious . 

It is not without purpose that I use the expression in our un- 
conscious, for what we so call does not coincide with the uncon- 
scious of the philosophers, nor with the unconscious of Lipps. As 
they use the term, it merely means the opposite of the conscious. 
That there exist not only conscious but also unconscious psychic 
processes is the opinion at issue, which is so hotly contested and 
so energetically defended. Lipps enunciates the more compre- 
hensive doctrine that everything psychic exists as unconscious, 
but that some of it may exist also as conscious. But it is not to 
prove this doctrine that we have adduced the phenomena of 
dreams and hysterical symptom-formation; the observation of 
normal life alone suffices to establish its correctness beyond a 
doubt. The novel fact that we have learned from the analysis 
of psycho-pathological formations, and indeed from the first 
member of the group, from dreams, is that the unconscious — 
and hence all that is psychic — occurs as a function of two sep- 
arate systems, and that as such it occurs even in normal psychic 
life. There are consequently two kinds of unconscious , which 
have not as yet been distinguished by psychologists. Both are 

42 Cf. here (p. 11) the dream ( 2 a~rvpos) of Alexander the Great at the 
siege of Tyre. 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 465 

unconscious in the psychological sense; but in our sense the 
first, which we call Ucs,, is likewise incapable of consciousness ; 
whereas the second we call Pcs . because its excitations, after the 
observance of certain rules, are capable of reaching conscious- 
ness; perhaps not before they have again undergone censorship, 
but nevertheless regardless of the Ucs . system. The fact that in 
order to attain consciousness the excitations must pass through 
an unalterable series, a succession of instances, as is betrayed 
by the changes produced in them by the censorship, has enabled 
us to describe them by analogy in spatial terms. We described 
the relations of the two systems to each other and to conscious- 
ness by saying that the system Pcs . is like a screen between the 
system Ucs. and consciousness. The system Pcs . not only bars 
access to consciousness, but also controls the access to voluntary 
motility, and has control of the emission of a mobile cathectic 
energy, a portion of which is familiar to us as attention . 43 

We must also steer dear of the distinction between the super- 
conscious and the subconscious , which has found such favour in 
the more recent literature on the psychoneuroses, for just such 
a distinction seems to emphasize the equivalence of what is 
psychic and what is conscious. 

What role is now left, in our representation of things, to the 
phenomenon of consciousness, once so all-powerful and over- 
shadowing all else? None other than that of a sense-organ for 
the perception of psychic qualities. According to the fundamental 
idea of our schematic attempt we can regard conscious perception 
only as the function proper to a special system for which the 
abbreviated designation Cs. commends itself. This system we 
conceive to be similar in its mechanical characteristics to the 
perception-system P, and hence excitable by qualities, and in- 
capable of retaining the trace of changes: i.e. devoid of memory. 
The psychic apparatus which, with the sense-organ of the P- 
systems, is turned to the outer world, is itself the outer world for 
the sense-organ of Cs., whose teleological justification depends 

43 Cf. here my remarks in the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Re - 
search, vol. xxvi, in which the descriptive, dynamic and systematic mean- 
ings of the ambiguous word “Unconscious” are distinguished from one an- 
other. 



466 THE interpretation of dreams 

on this relationship. We are here once more confronted with the 
principle of the succession of instances which seems to dominate 
the structure of the apparatus. The material of excitation flows 
to the sense-organ Cs. from two sides: first from the P-system, 
whose excitation, qualitatively conditioned, probably undergoes 
a new elaboration until it attains conscious perception; and, 
secondly, from the interior of the apparatus itself, whose quanti- 
tative processes are perceived as a qualitative series of pleasures 
and pains once they have reached consciousness after undergoing 
certain changes. 

The philosophers, who became aware that accurate and highly 
complicated thought-structures are possible even without the 
co-operation of consciousness, thus found it difficult to ascribe 
any function to consciousness; it appeared to them a superflu- 
ous mirroring of the completed psychic process. The analogy of 
our Cs. system with the perception-systems relieves us of this 
embarrassment. We see that perception through our sense- 
organs results in directing an attention-cathexis to the paths 
along which the incoming sensory excitation diffuses itself; the 
qualitative excitation of the P-system serves the mobile quan- 
tity in the psychic apparatus as a regulator of its discharge. We 
may claim the same function for the overlying sense-organ of 
the Cs. system. By perceiving new qualities, it furnishes a new 
contribution for the guidance and suitable distribution of the 
mobile cathexis-quantities. By means of perceptions of pleasure 
and pain, it influences the course of the cathexes within the 
psychic apparatus, which otherwise operates unconsciously and 
by the displacement of quantities. It is probable that the pain- 
principle first of all regulates the displacements of cathexis auto- 
matically, but it is quite possible that consciousness contributes 
a second and more subtle regulation of these qualities, which 
may even oppose the first, and perfect the functional capacity 
of die apparatus, by placing it in a position contrary to its orig- 
inal design, subjecting even that which induces pain to cathexis 
and to elaboration. We learn from neuro-psychology that an im- 
portant part in the functional activity of the apparatus is 
ascribed to these regulations by the qualitative excitations of 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 467 

the sense-organs. The automatic rule of the primary pain-prin- 
ciple, together with the limitation of functional capacity bound 
up with it, is broken by the sensory regulations, which are them- 
selves again automatisms. We find that repression, which, 
though originally expedient, nevertheless finally brings about a 
harmful lack of inhibition and of psychic control, overtakes 
memories much more easily than it does perceptions, because in 
the former there is no additional cathexis from the excitation of 
the psychic sense-organs. Whilst an idea which is to be warded 
off may fail to become conscious because it has succumbed to 
repression, it may on other occasions come to be repressed 
simply because it has been withdrawn from conscious perception 
on other grounds. These are clues which we make use of in ther- 
apy in order to undo accomplished repressions. 

The value of the hyper-cathexis which is produced by the 
regulating influence of the Cs. sense-organs on the mobile quan- 
tity is demonstrated in a teleological context by nothing more 
clearly than by the creation of a new series of qualities, and 
consequently a new regulation, which constitutes the preroga- 
tive of man over the animals. For the mental processes are in 
themselves unqualitative except for the excitations of pleasure 
and pain which accompany them: which, as we know, must be 
kept within limits as possible disturbers of thought. In order to 
endow them with quality, they are associated in man with verbal 
memories, the qualitative residues of which suffice to draw upon 
them the attention of consciousness, which in turn endows 
thought with a new mobile cathexis. 

It is only on a dissection of hysterical mental processes that 
the manifold nature of the problems of consciousness becomes 
apparent. One then receives the impression that the transition 
from the preconscious to the conscious cathexis is associated 
with a censorship similar to that between Ucs. and Pcs. This 
censorship, too, begins to act only when a certain quantitative 
limit is reached, so that thought-formations which are not very 
intense escape it. All possible cases of detention from conscious- 
ness and of penetration into consciousness under certain restric- 
tions are included within the range of psychoneurotic phenom- 


THE INTERPRETATION OP DREAMS 


4 68 

ena; all point to the intimate and twofold connection between 
the censorship and consciousness. I shall conclude these psycho* 
logical considerations with the record of two such occurrences. 

On the occasion of a consultation a few years ago, the patient 
was an intelligent-looking girl with a simple, unaffected manner. 
She was strangely attired; for whereas a woman’s dress is usu- 
ally carefully thought out to the last pleat, one of her stockings 
was hanging down and two of the buttons of her blouse were 
undone. She complained of pains in one of her legs, and exposed 
her calf without being asked to do so. Her chief complaint, how- 
ever, was as follows: She had a feeling in her body as though 
something were sticking into it which moved to and fro and 
shook her through and through . This sometimes seemed to make 
her whole body stiff . On hearing this, my colleague in consulta- 
tion looked at me; the trouble was quite obvious to him. To 
both of us it seemed peculiar that this suggested nothing to the 
patient’s mother, though she herself must repeatedly have been 
in the situation described by her child. As for the girl, she had 
no idea of the import of her words, or she would never have 
allowed them to pass her lips. Here the censorship had been 
hoodwinked so successfully that under the mask of an innocent 
complaint a phantasy was admitted to consciousness which 
otherwise would have remained in the preconscious. 

Another example: I began the psychoanalytic treatment of a 
boy of fourteen who was suffering from tic convulsif, hysterical 
vomiting, headache, etc., by assuring him that after closing his 
eyes he would see pictures or that ideas would occur to him, 
which he was to communicate to me. He replied by describing 
pictures. The last impression he had received before coming to 
me was revived visually in his memory. He had been playing a 
game of checkers with his uncle, and now he saw the checker- 
board before him. He commented on various positions that were 
favourable or unfavourable, on moves that were not safe to 
make. He then saw a dagger lying on the checker-board — an 
object belonging to his father, but which his phantasy laid on 
the checker-board. Then a sickle was lying on the board; a 
scythe was added; and finally, he saw the image of an old peas- 
ant mowing the grass in front of his father’s house far away. A 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OE THE DREAM-PROCESSES 469 

few days later I discovered the meaning of this series of pictures. 
Disagreeable family circumstances had made the boy excited 
and nervous. Here was a case of a harsh, irascible father, who 
had lived unhappily with the boy’s mother, and whose educa- 
tional methods consisted of threats; he had divorced his gentle 
and delicate wife, and remarried; one day he brought home a 
young woman as the boy’s new mother. The illness of the four- 
teen-year-old boy developed a few days later. It was the sup- 
pressed rage against his father that had combined these images 
into intelligible allusions. The material was furnished by a 
mythological reminiscence. The sickle was that with which Zeus 
castrated his father; the scythe and the image of the peasant 
represented Kronos, the violent old man who devours his chil- 
dren, and upon whom Zeus wreaks his vengeance in so unfilial 
a manner. The father’s marriage gave the boy an opportunity of 
returning the reproaches and threats which the child had once 
heard his father utter because he played with his genitals (the 
draught-board; the prohibited moves; the dagger with which 
one could kill). We have here long-impressed memories and 
their unconscious derivatives which, under the guise of mean- 
ingless pictures , have slipped into consciousness by the devious 
paths opened to them. 

If I were asked what is the theoretical value of the study of 
dreams, I should reply that it lies in the additions to psycho- 
logical knowledge and the beginnings of an understanding of 
the neuroses which we thereby obtain. Who can foresee the im- 
portance a thorough knowledge of the structure and functions 
of the psychic apparatus may attain, when even our present 
state of knowledge permits of successful therapeutic interven- 
tion in the curable forms of the psychoneuroses? But, it may be 
asked, what of the practical value of this study in regard to a 
knowledge of the psyche and discovery of the hidden peculiari- 
ties of individual character? Have not the unconscious impulses 
revealed by dreams the value of real forces in the psychic life? 
Is the ethical significance of the suppressed wishes to be lightly 
disregarded, since, just as they now create dreams, they may 
some day create other things? 

I do not feel justified in answering these questions. I have not 



4?0 THE INTERPRETATION OF DREAMS 

followed up this aspect of the problem of dreams. In any case, 
however, I believe that the Roman Emperor was in the wrong 
in ordering one of his subjects to be executed because the latter 
had dreamt that he had killed the Emperor. He should first of 
all have endeavoured to discover the significance of the man’s 
dream; most probably it was not what it seemed to be. And 
even if a dream of a different content had actually had this trea- 
sonable meaning, it would still have been well to recall the 
words of Plato — that the virtuous man contents himself with 
dreaming of that which the wicked man does in actual life. I am 
therefore of the opinion that dreams should be acquitted of evil. 
Whether any reality is to be attributed to the unconscious 
wishes, I cannot say. Reality must, of course, be denied to all 
transitory and intermediate thoughts. If we had before us the un- 
conscious wishes, brought to their final and truest expression, we 
should still do well to remember that psychic reality is a special 
form of existence which must not be confounded with material 
reality . It seems, therefore, unnecessary that people should refuse 
to accept the responsibility for the immorality of their dreams. 
With an appreciation of the mode of functioning of the psychic 
apparatus, and an insight into the relations between conscious 
and unconscious, all that is ethically offensive in our dream-life 
and the life of phantasy for the most part disappears. 

“What a dream has told us of our relations to the present 
(reality) we will then seek also in our consciousness, and we 
must not be surprised if we discover that the monster we saw 
under the magnifying-glass of the analysis is a tiny little in- 
fusorian” (H. Sachs). 

For all practical purposes in judging human character, a man’s 
actions and conscious expressions of thought are in most cases 
sufficient. Actions, above all, deserve to be placed in the front 
rank; for many impulses which penetrate into consciousness are 
neutralized by real forces in the psychic life before they find 
issue in action; indeed, the reason why they frequently do not 
encounter any psychic obstacle on their path is because the un- 
conscious is certain of their meeting with resis tan ce later. In 
any case, it is highly instructive to learn something of the in- 
tensively tilled soil from which our virtues proudly emerge. For 


THE PSYCHOLOGY OF THE DREAM-PROCESSES 47 1 

the complexity of human character, dynamically moved in all 
directions, very rarely accommodates itself to the arbitrament 
of a simple alternative, as our antiquated moral philosophy 
would have it. 

And what of the value of dreams in regard to our knowledge 
of the future? That, of course, is quite out of the question. One 
would like to substitute the words: “in regard to our knowledge 
of the past.” For in every sense a dream has its origin in the 
past. The ancient belief that dreams reveal the future is not 
indeed entirely devoid of truth. By representing a wish as ful- 
filled the dream certainly leads us into the future; but this 
future, which the dreamer accepts as his present, has been 
shaped in the likeness of the past by the indestructible wish. 